[Amit Varma]: Ever since I heard The Grateful Dead, I've thought of trucking as something kind of romantic,
[Amit Varma]: and yet it's also deeply poignant.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, the wide open highways, meeting new people, seeing new places, a kind of freedom
[Amit Varma]: from the fetters that tie down most of us.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, a life without roots, no sense of family, traveling all over, yes,
[Amit Varma]: but constrained in a box with wheels.
[Amit Varma]: You'd think truckers in India would know this vast and beautiful land more than most of
[Amit Varma]: us.
[Amit Varma]: But do they spend their time traveling in a moving cocoon, always on the move, yes,
[Amit Varma]: but perennially trapped?
[Amit Varma]: For a trucker, the journey is the destination, and that's usually a bug and not a feature.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Rajat Ubekar, who got this strange kida a few years ago of traveling
[Amit Varma]: around India in a truck, and that's exactly what he did.
[Amit Varma]: He went from Mumbai to Kashmir, and then to the Northeast, and then to South India, hitchhiking
[Amit Varma]: on trucks, making friends with truck drivers, getting a sense of their lives and journeys.
[Amit Varma]: And he wrote about it in a wonderful book called Truck Day India, A Hitchhiker's Guide
[Amit Varma]: to Hindustan.
[Amit Varma]: I was delighted to have Rajat on The Seen and The Unseen as we battled through a litany
[Amit Varma]: of technical issues, as if we were recording from a moving truck.
[Amit Varma]: When I record remotely, I do so using a software called Zencastr, and I also keep Zoom on mute
[Amit Varma]: so my guests and I can see each other and pick up visual cues.
[Amit Varma]: For this recording, first Zencastr didn't work, and then it did, but Zoom did not.
[Amit Varma]: And we tried Google Hangouts, and that didn't work.
[Amit Varma]: And we tried Skype, and that didn't work.
[Amit Varma]: And then we tried WhatsApp video call, and we could only record half a session.
[Amit Varma]: So we resumed a couple of days later, when Rajat's internet behaved itself, and we finally
[Amit Varma]: wrapped up the episode.
[Amit Varma]: Our conversation was a hell of a trip, and I mean that in a good way.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and The Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Seen and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this.
[Amit Varma]: For every episode of The Seen and The Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or
[Amit Varma]: even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to seenunseen.in slash support, and contributing an amount
[Amit Varma]: of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and The Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation, help keep this thing going, seenunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Rajat, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I have to tell our listeners that I am getting a sense of the rhythm of Rajat's
[Amit Varma]: book because in his book, there's a lot of waiting and a lot of hanging around as you
[Amit Varma]: know, waiting for trucks and waiting for traffic jams to resolve themselves because we started
[Amit Varma]: this recording exactly one hour late, because we had technical issues, first the Zencaster
[Amit Varma]: wasn't working, then the zoom wasn't working, then we tried a bunch of other things.
[Amit Varma]: And we finally got on to recording but never mind better late than never.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, maybe that's the enjoyment of the journey comes from all these little moments
[Amit Varma]: in between, though I think you know, technical glitches don't add anything to one's life.
[Amit Varma]: So Rajat, before we start talking about your fascinating book, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your personal journey, because, you know, you are an engineer, who then did journalism
[Amit Varma]: and won an award for it, who then went traveling around India on trucks, and you have just
[Amit Varma]: joined the civil services.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through this sort of very interesting journey of yours and how you came to writing
[Amit Varma]: per se, because that sort of seems to be the one great passion of your life, writing and
[Amit Varma]: traveling.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's definitely been an interesting journey so far.
[Guest]: So as far as my personal background goes, I basically hail from Karnataka, coastal Karnataka.
[Guest]: I was born in Patkal and brought up largely in Mumbai.
[Guest]: Part of my schooling was also in a military school in Satara, Sainik school, Satara.
[Guest]: And after that, I joined IIT Kanpur, where I studied electrical engineering.
[Guest]: Writing and reading have been abiding passions in my life, as far as I remember, right from
[Guest]: my childhood, I remember scouring these secondhand rattiwalas, trying to find some Amar Chitra
[Guest]: Katal or any novel that would excite me.
[Guest]: So right since childhood, I've been interested in reading.
[Guest]: The reason why I went into engineering was, of course, like many other kids who got decent
[Guest]: marks, it made the most sense.
[Guest]: And I don't regret it at all, because a background in science, I feel is definitely helpful everywhere,
[Guest]: especially in any stream.
[Guest]: So I don't regret it.
[Guest]: Also, I met some amazing people in IITK who continue to be close to me.
[Guest]: So no regrets over there.
[Guest]: In my third year or fourth year, I finally decided that I wanted to get into journalism.
[Guest]: Essentially, it was, I did not want to do a desk job in my early 20s.
[Guest]: I had this deep hunger to see as much of India as possible.
[Guest]: And part of that hunger also led me to Kanpur in the first place, because I'm from Bombay
[Guest]: essentially.
[Guest]: But I did not want to be stuck in Bombay, close to my parents forever.
[Guest]: So I decided to join IITK.
[Guest]: So there's this connect throughout my life I see about wanting to see as much of India
[Guest]: as possible.
[Guest]: And I worked for a year after graduation in a management consultancy, got a decent job.
[Guest]: So I thought I'd give the corporate world a try before stitching it all together, just
[Guest]: to make sure I won't regret it, just for my own satisfaction.
[Guest]: And after a year or so, I joined the Asian College of Journalism.
[Guest]: And from there on, I worked as a business journalist for a couple of years in Bombay.
[Guest]: And while working as a business journalist, I really decided that I had to go on this
[Guest]: trip across India.
[Guest]: The seed of that idea, I think, had been with me right since my college days.
[Guest]: So as I write in the book, in my first year, one truck driver had very kindly rescued us
[Guest]: from a light while he was stranded on a highway near Shimla.
[Guest]: And that sort of stayed with me and the idea of their lives, it appealed to me.
[Guest]: And I thought that in my early 20s, I should do something like that.
[Guest]: But it crystallized only by the time I was around 23-24.
[Guest]: And one fine day, I walk into my editor's office, I tell her, ma'am, see, I did I have
[Guest]: this crazy idea in my mind, I want to travel across India.
[Guest]: So please, I want to quit right now.
[Guest]: So because obviously, you won't keep me you won't give me a holiday for like three, four
[Guest]: months.
[Guest]: So but she turned out to be much more sensible than I was.
[Guest]: She suggested that I write a six-part series for the magazine.
[Guest]: And I jumped at it.
[Guest]: I mean, I thought I wouldn't get a better chance.
[Guest]: I mean, you're getting paid your salary while you are sort of exploring India by truck.
[Guest]: So I thought couldn't get better.
[Guest]: And later at one point, even Indian Oil Corporation sort of sponsored the trip.
[Guest]: So it all worked out somehow, I was lucky.
[Guest]: And that's been my broad journey.
[Guest]: And apart from that, recently, I have cleared the UTC exam.
[Amit Varma]: So let's see where that takes me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, you might just after all the things you wrote about, sort of the predatory state
[Amit Varma]: in your book, not in so many words, those are my words, but that's how a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: book came across.
[Amit Varma]: It'll kind of be sweetly ironic, you're sort of joining that service and hopefully making
[Amit Varma]: things better.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know it's kind of futile often to ask a reader, what kind of writing do they like?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think a lot of readers who are drawn to this voracious hunger for just reading
[Amit Varma]: anything that they can get their hands on.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a fair question that your reading will naturally tend to be eclectic.
[Amit Varma]: But given that you also love to travel and love seeing new places and all of that, which
[Amit Varma]: of course, bookstores, books are a window to other places.
[Amit Varma]: But was there also an attraction, therefore, to people who write about travel and write
[Amit Varma]: about going to places like were there models for you?
[Amit Varma]: Did you ever read a writer and think, huh, that's the kind of thing I want to write and
[Guest]: so on?
[Guest]: So one book which I distinctly remember leaving an impression on me was something I read when
[Guest]: I was in ACJ.
[Guest]: It's this book called A Free Man by Aman Sethi.
[Guest]: So what that book showed me was that it is possible to write about India's working class,
[Guest]: its informal economy, so to say, in a sensitive manner, in an entertaining manner, in an informative
[Guest]: manner, because the lives of us middle class people is so cocooned in many ways, we are
[Guest]: unaware of the varied struggles, the various jugars, which people employ in India to live
[Guest]: out their life day to day.
[Guest]: So that book, which is about a bunch of daily wage laborers in Delhi, when I read that book,
[Guest]: I thought, I have to absolutely write something about truck drivers, I mean, their life is
[Guest]: in some ways more fascinating than that of a daily wage laborer also, because the kind
[Guest]: of landscapes they're exposed to, the kind of characters they're exposed to on a daily
[Guest]: basis seem to me to be material fit for a book.
[Guest]: And I could say that book definitely was a huge influence on me.
[Guest]: And apart from that, as far as the writing style is concerned, I veer towards the more
[Guest]: simple writing rather than the more flowery writing, which is difficult to pull off.
[Guest]: I mean, except for a few exceptions, like Wodehouse, who can pull off that sort of writing
[Guest]: so beautifully.
[Guest]: I have always been attracted towards simplicity in writing.
[Guest]: So as far as models around that, those are concerned, Hemingway, definitely, whom I read
[Guest]: during the final years of my college was quite an influence.
[Guest]: Yeah, that would be it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, come to my arms, because I teach this course on clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: And I often when I talk about writing in that, you know, I cite George Orwell's famous quote,
[Amit Varma]: good prose is like a windowpane, the whole point being that the windowpane is a means
[Amit Varma]: to an end.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, prose like a windowpane should just be clear, a windowpane is supposed
[Amit Varma]: to show you what's on the other side and not draw attention to itself.
[Amit Varma]: And the example I gave of an exception to that is the same one you gave, which is Woodhouse,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, in his case, the beautiful things that he does with the prose is an end
[Amit Varma]: in itself.
[Amit Varma]: And that's fine.
[Amit Varma]: But one should not get carried away by that, because everybody cannot be Woodhouse.
[Amit Varma]: And I like the clarity in your style, and also the sort of the conversational feel of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you throw in a lot of sort of light touches of humor, just perfect places,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of really worked for me.
[Amit Varma]: Was there a process that you went through in sort of finding your voice as it was the
[Amit Varma]: voice of the book, so to say, or is it something that, you know, was very clear from the start?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you sort of have to experiment a bit and, you know, write a bit till you discovered
[Amit Varma]: what the right voice would be?
[Guest]: Initially, I found myself getting bogged down in these long winded sentences.
[Guest]: I mean, the initial process was quite a bit of a struggle.
[Guest]: My basic aim with this book was to appeal to the non-reader.
[Guest]: I mean, I did not want the reader, whoever he or she may be, to get bored at any point
[Guest]: in the sense, even though I had some interesting facts to share, or anything which I find to
[Guest]: be interesting, but essentially the reader may not because it's been, it's too long
[Guest]: winded or it's been going on for a while.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it went through a constant process of refinement.
[Guest]: The end goal being, it should hold the reader's attention.
[Guest]: And we are so easily distracted these days, right?
[Guest]: And I think the job of writing is to make it as easy as possible for the reader.
[Guest]: And that is the most challenging part.
[Guest]: The process largely consisted of defining the text.
[Guest]: I do not believe in the draft system.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't usually maintain too many drafts.
[Guest]: I get too confused at the end if there are seven or eight of them.
[Guest]: So I typically just tweak, tweak, tweak until, I mean, it's never really finished, but until
[Guest]: it meets a certain level of satisfaction, until then I keep tweaking.
[Amit Varma]: That's my broad process when I'm writing.
[Amit Varma]: I was struck by this quote at the start of your book by John Steinbeck, where he says,
[Amit Varma]: quote, we find after years of struggle that we do not take a trip, a trip takes us, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, which, you know, would appear to the reader is written in the context of the book
[Amit Varma]: that is to follow.
[Amit Varma]: But it also struck me that it has a broader resonance.
[Amit Varma]: And that's sort of what I want to ask you about in the sense that, you know, you said
[Amit Varma]: you did engineering and engineering has its own sort of subcultures and lingos and ways
[Amit Varma]: of speaking and ways of thinking about the world.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, after that, you, you know, go to the ACJ and you get into journalism and journalism
[Amit Varma]: also has its own little subcultures depending on where you are.
[Amit Varma]: And then you go around the country with these struckers and there, as you've described so
[Amit Varma]: beautifully, there are all these little subcultures and rituals and these worlds that you inhabit,
[Amit Varma]: which are in fact, as you've shown in the book, different from place to place.
[Amit Varma]: It's one thing in the north, another thing in the northeast and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of got me to thinking about how our experiences shape us so profoundly,
[Amit Varma]: because it struck me while reading the book that some of these subcultures would have
[Amit Varma]: nothing in common with the other ones like the engineering subculture and say the trucking
[Amit Varma]: subculture where, you know, there are a few things in common, such as the technology where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people use WhatsApp and make Facebook friends from other countries.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, the worlds are so different, they relate to other people so differently
[Amit Varma]: and all of this.
[Amit Varma]: So do you find that as sort of a visitor in these different worlds, that you can take
[Amit Varma]: a step back and look at your friends in each of these worlds, and that their worldview
[Amit Varma]: in some ways constricted because of the relative narrowness of their experiences?
[Guest]: That's a great question, Amit, and I 100% agree with you.
[Guest]: I mean, there's this great quote in the book, English August, actually, that I never allow
[Guest]: two of my friends from different circles to ever meet.
[Guest]: That would be two worlds colliding, because we often have these little bubbles, right?
[Guest]: What I see the world as is composed of these little bubbles who think that the entire world
[Guest]: revolves around them.
[Guest]: I mean, many of my friends are in the startup world, and the startup bubble is other world
[Guest]: altogether.
[Guest]: I mean, when I go to meet them in Bangalore, sometimes, it's like a step into other portal.
[Guest]: At the same time, I mean, journalism, of course, is, I mean, one of the reasons why I got into
[Guest]: journalism was to sort of partake of these different bubbles, at least get a glimpse
[Guest]: of these different worlds and expand my worldview through that.
[Guest]: That was one of the reasons I got into journalism.
[Guest]: And yes, I would definitely say that having this sort of limited worldview, often, I've
[Guest]: seen it among my engineering batch mates also, the world is very limited for the options
[Guest]: themselves are so limited after graduation, either you join the corporate world or you
[Guest]: get into a startup or you start studying for the UPS, these are broadly the or you go for
[Guest]: a master's abroad.
[Guest]: And it's essentially limited to these options.
[Guest]: And I would say yes, the trip of traveling with truckers across India opened my eyes
[Guest]: in so many ways, which I hope to have shared with the reader through the book.
[Guest]: And I hope the reader learns something about the many India's that are country in our
[Amit Varma]: world.
[Amit Varma]: It was also fascinating for me, like I remember back in my days as a professional poker player,
[Amit Varma]: I would play with or before so I would have to play with all kinds of I used to play the
[Amit Varma]: underground cash games in Bombay, I have to play with all kinds of people I would otherwise
[Amit Varma]: not interact with.
[Amit Varma]: So whether it's a group of builders in Varshi, I've played with film stars in Warsaw, and
[Amit Varma]: you know, one group I used to play with, they were people who had grown up going to your
[Amit Varma]: local RSA shakha every week and were hardcore sort of sanghis in that sense and absolutely
[Amit Varma]: lovely people, right.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens in the culture is that, you know, given whichever bubble we are part of,
[Amit Varma]: we'll sometimes demonize people from different bubbles and not sort of, you know, be completely
[Amit Varma]: devoid of a deeper understanding of why other people are the way they are.
[Amit Varma]: And they are also three dimensional and they contain multitudes and all of that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: given that you were into writing, given that you wanted to travel, and therefore, all of
[Amit Varma]: these different interests and passions seem to have coalesced towards this particular
[Amit Varma]: journey that you took.
[Amit Varma]: But what drew you to the idea of this particular book, like you mentioned, a truck driver helped
[Amit Varma]: you when you were stranded in Shimla a long time ago, what in particular was sort of the
[Amit Varma]: expectation that you took into it?
[Amit Varma]: And did that differ from your experience eventually, because sometimes I imagine what can happen
[Amit Varma]: is that you can go into something with a romantic notion that, hey, I'm going to travel the
[Amit Varma]: country in a truck, and I'm going to soak up all the different cultural influences.
[Amit Varma]: And at the end of it, I'll have this masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: And then you actually go and you're just sitting around for 12 hours waiting at a traffic jam
[Amit Varma]: at a naka with guys who want nothing but to view porn on your phone.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, were there sort of moments like that when expectations differed from reality
[Amit Varma]: or did you go into it with the attitude that everything is an unknown unknown, I'll just
[Amit Varma]: finish the journey and then I'll start forming narratives?
[Guest]: I mean, my expectations while I was going for the journey, my only expectation was that
[Guest]: hopefully I'll come out of it alive.
[Guest]: To be honest, I did not have any preconceived notions, I guess I must have shared some of
[Guest]: the sort of stereotypes that exist about truckers subconsciously, that you know, they are drunk
[Guest]: or I know all stereotypes, one may say that are rooted in some form of truth.
[Guest]: So I may have shared those, but I went in with a totally blank slate and prepared mentally
[Guest]: for all sorts of physical privations, all sorts of troubles on the way and broadly lived
[Guest]: up to those expectations in the sense I was right to not expect anything out of it.
[Guest]: Because just look, I mean, how I set out on the journey itself, I mean, my first, the
[Guest]: first trucker I hitchhiked with, he was someone who was connected to me by a friend who knew
[Guest]: someone who was working in a transport office.
[Guest]: So that was through a connection.
[Guest]: After that, I was essentially on my own.
[Guest]: I had no idea how I would find another trucker, where I would go.
[Guest]: So that was a huge unknown out there.
[Guest]: And it was a source of considerable anxiety to begin with, because I had no idea how I
[Guest]: would actually manage it in a practical sense.
[Guest]: But as the journey progressed, slowly my expectations also started becoming more clear, in the sense
[Guest]: what can I expect from people, though they were also always belied, I mean, all these
[Guest]: expectations were never really there, because truckers, there are hundreds of different
[Guest]: kinds of truckers and personalities of everyone differs.
[Guest]: And basically, every trip, every truck that you get in, get inside is another world.
[Guest]: I mean, you, the people are different, their stories are different.
[Guest]: I mean, that's what I really enjoy about India in some way, you know, I mean, there is this
[Guest]: particular vantage point of the Indian middle class or the upper middle class, which sort
[Guest]: of views the rest of India as the great unwashed, you know, I mean, there's this homogenous
[Guest]: mass of people who essentially are there to serve us, but what I really enjoy seeing is
[Guest]: in the particular histories that are contained within each person, their own life stories,
[Guest]: their own background, their family history, I mean, everything says so much about India.
[Guest]: And it's like a great learning experience and meeting someone outside of your social
[Guest]: circle and getting to really know their background, it's, it's an education.
[Guest]: And that's what this trip was, I mean, I was hoping it would be an education and this is
[Amit Varma]: definitely was.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in our normal lives, or rather in our sort of regular lives, I would not
[Amit Varma]: say this not normal in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: But in our regular lives, we are all sort of constantly anxious about how other people
[Amit Varma]: perceive us.
[Amit Varma]: And in most of our lives, that anxiety is about we want to seem knowledgeable and sophisticated
[Amit Varma]: and smart and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I imagine here that it's a different kind of anxiety, because you, you know, there is
[Amit Varma]: a difference of class and privilege here.
[Amit Varma]: And for you, the tension must have been how do I fit in, I don't want them to feel as
[Amit Varma]: if I'm coming at them from a place that is above them, you know, not just in terms of
[Amit Varma]: class or whatever, but even your approach and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you sort of, you know, deal with that?
[Amit Varma]: Was there that anxiety that how do I, how do I fit in?
[Amit Varma]: Should I joke with them?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of language should I use?
[Amit Varma]: How did you navigate all of those things?
[Guest]: That anxiety definitely was there to begin with.
[Guest]: So what I did was before setting out on the journey itself, I visited a couple of truck
[Guest]: terminals.
[Guest]: There's this huge one in Karamburi and another one in Vadala and I interacted with the truckers
[Guest]: over there just to see, get a sense of what they are like in reality and the kind of warmth
[Guest]: and generosity that I saw even there really played a big part in reassuring that if your
[Guest]: intentions are genuine, if you don't condescend to them and if you don't patronize them, they
[Guest]: are perfectly good people who will answer all your questions happily because they have
[Guest]: so many grievances inside them over the years, which no one has ever cared for or asked or
[Guest]: addressed in any way that if there's someone who's asking them genuine questions about
[Guest]: what problems they face, what their life has been like, they are more than happy to answer.
[Guest]: So I went in with the expectation that I should just be a genuine person.
[Guest]: If my intentions are, I don't have any vested interests and if I actually go there and if
[Guest]: I do care about their lives in some way, that comes across when you're interacting with
[Guest]: strangers.
[Guest]: What I've realized is that your eyes and your smile, they reveal a lot about you and about
[Guest]: your intentions and other human beings can definitely see that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'm reminded of the title of this great book, which came out a few decades ago
[Amit Varma]: by Alan Siletto called The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner.
[Amit Varma]: And it seemed, you know, you could also have something called The Loneliness of the Long
[Amit Varma]: Distance Trucker.
[Amit Varma]: And is that part of the reason, like I'm assuming when you say that they were warmer and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, nicer towards you than you might have expected or than this, you know, the middle
[Amit Varma]: class stereotypes about the unwashed might lead you to believing, do you think that's
[Amit Varma]: part of the reason is that they're always on the road, those personal connections aren't
[Amit Varma]: really happening?
[Amit Varma]: Like, the way you've kind of described the mini worlds of each of these truckers, it
[Amit Varma]: seems like, you know, there'll be two or three people traveling together in a truck and that's
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, that's their whole world and a lot of other stuff is peripheral and they
[Amit Varma]: must be sort of craving to talk to other people.
[Amit Varma]: You know, is that a sort of sense also that you got of the truckers life?
[Guest]: Yes, I think that you're right, because most of the truckers I felt were very lonely.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a lonely job, and especially when you are alone, like so many truckers
[Guest]: in India travel alone, they won't even have a khalasi.
[Guest]: So when you're alone, it's an immensely lonely job, a monotonous job with few distractions.
[Guest]: I mean, you stop and have some kutka, that's your break, you have some chai and then you
[Guest]: want some kutka, that's pretty much your break.
[Guest]: And when someone like me, for instance, asks them, gets into the vehicle, it's not only
[Guest]: good company, I mean, it's just you get to unload some of the baggage that you have accumulated
[Guest]: over the years in the truck.
[Guest]: So definitely that did play a part in shaping their attitudes towards me as this sort of
[Guest]: privileged person in their midst.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, one of the things that I was kind of struck by curiosity for and your book
[Amit Varma]: gave so many fascinating glimpses of it, was what is the interior life of a trucker?
[Amit Varma]: You know, and obviously, there's no sort of one answer to this.
[Amit Varma]: But I was struck by this, you know, fascinating quote from someone called Shyam, who you said
[Amit Varma]: was a man of few words.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, when you ask him that, why did you come into trucking?
[Amit Varma]: He says this little bit, which I'm going to read out because I found it so fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: where he says, quote, in a word music, in Kangra as a style, I had many cousins who
[Amit Varma]: drove trucks.
[Amit Varma]: They would allow me to ride with them sometimes and play songs all along the way.
[Amit Varma]: Those are some of the best memories I have.
[Amit Varma]: That's when I decided I should get into this line, drive trucks to distant places, listening
[Amit Varma]: to music all along.
[Amit Varma]: I was not interested in studies.
[Amit Varma]: All I wanted was my music, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I found this so interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about how, you know, all his music was so sort of carefully curated on,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the USB drive, which he would have, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it's such a fascinating story.
[Amit Varma]: And you think of how this person placed in a different social context could live a totally
[Amit Varma]: different life.
[Amit Varma]: Like someone with a passion for music born in a good family in Delhi or in a Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: family in Bombay would be a whole different thing.
[Amit Varma]: And this person's way of indulging this passion is sort of to become a truck driver.
[Amit Varma]: At another point, another trucker, you ask the same question to another trucker somewhere
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Amit Varma]: And he replied, quote, what should I tell you, I've done almost everything that a man
[Amit Varma]: can do.
[Amit Varma]: I've been a truck driver, a tailor, a grape seller, a mechanic, a salesman, and more don't
[Amit Varma]: didn't stick to any job for more than two years.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm old now.
[Amit Varma]: Don't have energy left anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And to this you commented on this by writing, quote, it's a sort of self description most
[Amit Varma]: working class men in India would have given if only someone asked them.
[Amit Varma]: India's informal sector does have a way of making ordinary people multifaceted, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me that here that there are, you know, you talk a lot in your book about
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of jugar, which is that you're figuring out a way to make something
[Amit Varma]: work, whether it is, you know, cooling bottles of water by putting them on the windshield
[Amit Varma]: where the wind blows against them or another.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems to me that even beyond the jugar of immediate functionality, there is also
[Amit Varma]: a jugar of life, where in a certain way, given the poverty in this country, given the scarcities,
[Amit Varma]: given the lack of opportunities, many people have, you know, which, you know, your whole
[Amit Varma]: life becomes a way of sort of going against different tides being buffeted this way and
[Amit Varma]: that way and all the time doing jugar, jugar, jugar, jugar, jugar.
[Amit Varma]: So all of this, whether you're a tailor or a grape seller or a mechanic or a truck driver,
[Amit Varma]: it's different kinds of jugars at a time.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something you got a sense of?
[Amit Varma]: And was there sort of a poignancy that you felt, which I as a reader reading your wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book certainly did, of, you know, the helplessness of these sort of lives and the fact that these
[Amit Varma]: guys are still so cheerful and they're going along and they're in whatever, what was that
[Amit Varma]: sort of sense like?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, the overwhelming sense that I get from my travels is that of wasted potential.
[Guest]: I see so many, so many bright people, I mean, it's so obvious that they are bright, given
[Guest]: the right circumstances, they could have become anything they wanted.
[Guest]: That I feel is the fundamental tragedy of India, the wasted potential, whether it be
[Guest]: in terms of sports, whether it be in terms of intellect, there's all kinds of talent
[Guest]: out there.
[Guest]: People are so smart, I mean, we, I mean, this kind of reduction of smartness to academic
[Guest]: performance is, does not do justice to the various kinds of intelligence that Indians
[Guest]: have.
[Guest]: And the point that you said about being multifaceted, right, that is something which recurred again
[Guest]: and again.
[Guest]: I mean, just to make ends meet, people learn all kinds of skills, they learn different
[Guest]: languages, they move to Kerala or Bihar, you will start speaking Malayalam within a year.
[Guest]: So there's this enormous reservoir of talent out there, which is both wasted day in and
[Guest]: day out in India.
[Guest]: And I feel that it's definitely sad when I think about it, but it's also a way to be
[Guest]: free.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the book that I talked about, A Free Man by M. N. Sethi, that is essentially
[Guest]: how often many people who live day to day, they are just pursuing freedom.
[Guest]: I mean, what we perceive as a job and as this lifestyle that we have to meet, these are
[Guest]: all constraints that bind us, we're all pawns in some way.
[Guest]: But it could be argued that a truly free person is someone who does not have these large forces
[Guest]: which are always keeping him constrained.
[Guest]: Like there's this good quote by Leonard Cohen, like a bird on the wire, like a child drunk
[Guest]: in a midnight choir, I have tried in my way to be free.
[Guest]: And that quote really speaks to me, and it sort of encapsulates the lives of all these
[Guest]: Indians that I met on the road.
[Amit Varma]: You know, another thing that kind of made me very sad in the book was a sense of how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, worldviews can be so constricted and constrained by what you experience.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we spoke about it earlier, about these different subcultures.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you described it as, you know, all these bubbles which, you know, exist and
[Amit Varma]: don't intersect.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you know, we can joke about how IIT engineers bubble stops them from so
[Amit Varma]: many experiences and seeing whatever, but in the case of the truckers, it seems even
[Amit Varma]: more poignant to me.
[Amit Varma]: Because once you get into that trucking life, which, you know, can happen when you're in
[Amit Varma]: your mid teens, for example, you know, you've spoken of people in the book coming into it
[Amit Varma]: as a khalasi.
[Amit Varma]: A khalasi, by the way, for the listeners is an apprentice to a truck driver who will ride
[Amit Varma]: around with him for two, three years and perform odd jobs and then eventually graduate to become
[Amit Varma]: a driver.
[Amit Varma]: So that's your guru-shishya parampara in a sense of trucking and people become khalasis
[Amit Varma]: when they are in their teens.
[Amit Varma]: And from then it strikes me that what they know of the world is so limited, you know,
[Amit Varma]: because many of them will have smartphones, you know, especially in the West and the South.
[Amit Varma]: As you pointed out, a couple of truckers you were with had better smartphones than you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and there might be some influences coming from there, but they're close to so
[Amit Varma]: much of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And one example of this, which really stayed with me was you spoke about a Kashmiri truck
[Amit Varma]: driver who was explaining to you the problem between India and Pakistan, the problem of
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: And to him, it all came down to apples.
[Amit Varma]: He said the apples of Kashmir are so good that Indians don't want the apples to go to
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan and Pakistan is closer.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why the army has to occupy Kashmir, which is stunning, which is stunning.
[Amit Varma]: And yet so rational for someone who is, who may not have experienced or read about any
[Amit Varma]: of the discord between these two countries and all of these big geopolitical currents,
[Amit Varma]: other than the beauty of these apples, you know, and appreciation for them.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously there were different trucking subcultures because you went to so many different
[Amit Varma]: places.
[Amit Varma]: But is that something that also kind of struck you and, you know, you know, got you thinking
[Amit Varma]: while you were on your travels?
[Guest]: There is a certain degree of insularity among truckers because while we think of them as
[Guest]: these all India movers of goods, the fact is their circle is quite limited.
[Guest]: They are mostly hangout with people from their own caste or from their own village, maximum
[Guest]: from their own region.
[Guest]: So across India, there are these dhabas which specify what kind of dhaba they are, whether
[Guest]: a Rajasthani dhaba or a Bengal dhaba.
[Guest]: So then the truckers hailing from these regions will specifically go only to these dhabas
[Guest]: where they know that people belonging to their region hangout and their goods are safe and
[Guest]: their truck is safe.
[Guest]: So their world is quite insular and I would say that interaction with other forces are
[Guest]: usually negative.
[Guest]: I mean, any person outside their circle whom they interact with is either out there to
[Guest]: harass him or extort money from him.
[Guest]: So their perception of the outside world is not necessarily very good because the kind
[Guest]: of stigma that they have in society, they are regarded with hostility and suspicion
[Guest]: at large.
[Guest]: I mean, you take any random person off the street, you ask them their opinion about truckers,
[Guest]: it's very likely it's going to be negative.
[Guest]: So they themselves also have this sort of distrust of the larger society and in many
[Guest]: ways they have also internalized this paraya status in society.
[Guest]: Like one trucker whom I met in Udaipur described himself as belonging to the seti swichat,
[Guest]: which is essentially someone who does not belong in a respectable society, who is an
[Guest]: outcast in some ways.
[Guest]: So that sort of self-description really struck me because they have internalized their lowly
[Guest]: status in society.
[Guest]: Many of them.
[Guest]: In the south, I met many proud truck drivers as well, who told me that we don't take
[Guest]: shit from anyone, whether it be the owner or the people.
[Guest]: So it's certainly not a homogenous thing, but to a large extent, yes, they have internalized
[Guest]: their lowly status and are insular in ways which prevents them from seeing the larger
[Guest]: picture.
[Guest]: I mean, you just look at the job they're doing, right?
[Guest]: They are the larger picture, actually, because they are the ones who are transporting goods
[Guest]: everywhere.
[Guest]: They are the logistics, but they only get to see a small part of the whole picture,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They are essentially the supply chain, which is our entire economy, but they only ever
[Guest]: get to see a small part of it, which is, okay, I need to load these goods here and deliver
[Guest]: it there.
[Guest]: It's like so many structural forces are preventing them from seeing the larger picture in many
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you mentioned the saitisvi jaat thing and I was struck by the full quote, which
[Amit Varma]: is in your book where this person says to you, saitisvi jaat kehlate hai hum truck driver
[Amit Varma]: aur chhattisvi jaat hai yeh transporters jo hum jaise jaanvaron ko paalte hai, which seems
[Amit Varma]: to be a very sort of a perceptive way of seeing yourself at the bottom of the food chain and
[Amit Varma]: the guy above you, you know that he's, you know, treating you like a paaltu jaanvar,
[Amit Varma]: but he's just one rung above you and you also kind of know that, which seems interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And what also sort of struck me is you spoke about how the status of truck drivers has
[Amit Varma]: actually diminished over the decades.
[Amit Varma]: Like you know, you have this bit where you're speaking about it, you know, how a truck driver
[Amit Varma]: friend of yours is telling you about quote, the notoriety truck drivers enjoy in society
[Amit Varma]: and you write quote, he tells me it wasn't always like this.
[Amit Varma]: In the 80s, when his father started driving trucks, the status of truckers was very different
[Amit Varma]: from what it is now.
[Amit Varma]: Without power steering, driving trucks was considered a relatively skilled, well-paid
[Amit Varma]: job, much like crane and forklift operators now.
[Amit Varma]: Villagers, largely cut off from the world, would welcome them as a harbingers of goods
[Amit Varma]: and news, treat them to tea, even invite them into their homes, doktor ke barabar maante
[Amit Varma]: the, and here you quoted that guy, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this also drives on how enormous the changes of the last couple of decades are not just
[Amit Varma]: in this context, because you talk of how villagers cut off from the world would look at getting
[Amit Varma]: their news from truckers.
[Amit Varma]: And now the villagers have smartphones and many ways of getting the news and they don't
[Amit Varma]: need truckers anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, trucking has lost some of the skill because power steering and all
[Amit Varma]: these other things have come into it.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, truckers, in a sense, are, you know, much more cut off from the
[Amit Varma]: world than these sort of villagers.
[Amit Varma]: Does this become an issue, say, with something that the older truckers deal with?
[Amit Varma]: Because the older truckers might have gotten into the game at a time where it wasn't such
[Amit Varma]: a lowly profession, so to say, or a sainthi swijat, and now you're a nobody and you're
[Amit Varma]: a nothing.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about one trucker who, you know, did a b comm and wanted to do management,
[Amit Varma]: and his father would not let him put him in the truck business.
[Amit Varma]: And he is cursing his father that what kind of a father would do that to his son?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a difference in approach and attitude between the older guys, the middle aged guys,
[Amit Varma]: the middle aged guys of my age, and maybe the young guys of your age?
[Guest]: Yeah, so, you know, among the older guys, I have asked them, I mean, what I used to
[Guest]: ask them was, what do you think, you're so experienced, you have like so many years of
[Guest]: experience on the road, does that mean anything to the people who are hiring you?
[Guest]: And that is where the main essential problem lies, because this sort of experience does
[Guest]: not have any value.
[Guest]: In fact, what they told me was that I'm old, so these guys will discard me, they want someone
[Guest]: young to work longer hours, sleep less and get managed with lesser sleep.
[Guest]: So there's this immense sense of frustration that I have worked all my life, it's like
[Guest]: a dead end job, right?
[Guest]: There's no avenue to go up, once you start as a truck driver, it's not like you will
[Guest]: get any increment, or there will be any sort of change in your designation.
[Guest]: And that sense of frustration was immense, especially in the middle aged drivers, who
[Guest]: see that after all these years of slogging, their savings are negligible, their children
[Guest]: are also not as educated as they would have liked them to be, many of them have ended
[Guest]: up joining them only.
[Guest]: And that sense was there, the younger ones, they were more of hustlers, I would say, the
[Guest]: attitude was the same, in the sense that I'm trying this out for now, but might move on
[Guest]: to something else.
[Guest]: So one of the truckers whom I met was treating this as sort of, treating the job of driving
[Guest]: trucks as practice for his driving test to become a bus driver.
[Guest]: So they have other ambitions, they know there are other avenues out there to earn money.
[Guest]: And they are also keenly aware that becoming a truck driver is like, you are a nobody in
[Guest]: society, you are likely to be looked down and judged and harassed and extorted, they
[Guest]: are very well aware of that.
[Guest]: And they are constantly looking out for other avenues.
[Guest]: I mean, there's one survey which was conducted recently by Save Life Foundation, which said
[Guest]: that around 85% of the truckers would not recommend trucking as a job to their family
[Guest]: members or their relatives or whoever.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of status there is.
[Guest]: But you're right, in the early days in the 80s and 90s, 80s were like a proper boom decade
[Guest]: for trucking.
[Guest]: There are some figures which I found out about commercial vehicle production, it really boomed
[Guest]: from the 80s to the 90s.
[Guest]: And this can be seen also from the small town of Namakkal, where they build these trucks,
[Guest]: where the number of people employed jumped from 5000 to 17000.
[Guest]: In just 10 years, there was over a threefold rise in the people employed in making trucks.
[Guest]: And while we like to think of the 90s as the real sort of liberalization and boom decade,
[Guest]: but it's clear that the 80s, there was a lot of build up in terms of economic growth in
[Guest]: the 80s itself.
[Guest]: And there's no better correlator of economic growth like commercial vehicles.
[Guest]: I mean, they are the best way possibly to figure out how the economy at large is doing.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I hope that answers your question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about the older truck drivers is also kind of illustrative of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a mistake young people often make and old people warn about where you assume that you
[Amit Varma]: are making some small decision and it is not a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I will, you know, I can't find a job right now, I'll start driving a truck,
[Amit Varma]: let's see how it goes.
[Amit Varma]: And before you know it, 25 years have passed, and there's nothing else you can do.
[Amit Varma]: And your whole life has gone by and you're kind of stuck in like you said, it's not even
[Amit Varma]: like a career track, that you get increments and you get promoted from intern all the way
[Amit Varma]: to CEO.
[Amit Varma]: If you're driving a truck, you're driving a truck.
[Amit Varma]: You're not a CEO at any point, especially when, you know, so much of the industry like
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out is, you know, not corporatized at all.
[Amit Varma]: Like you spoke about how I think 75% or three fourths of the trucking in India is by owners
[Amit Varma]: who own five trucks or less.
[Amit Varma]: So it's all just a bunch of really small outfits and there aren't structures within which you
[Amit Varma]: can rise.
[Amit Varma]: I want to, you know, go back a little bit to that whole question of sort of caste and
[Amit Varma]: divisions that we sort of spoke about.
[Amit Varma]: Like one on the whole, you pointed out about how truckers see themselves as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Santhisvijat or the lowest of all castes.
[Amit Varma]: But you've also spoken about, you know, when you were traveling through the north, the
[Amit Varma]: divisions between Punjabis versus Haryanvis and Jats, where Punjabis are like, we were
[Amit Varma]: the original truckers and it was a glamorous life.
[Amit Varma]: And then these Haryanvis and Jats came and messed it up and look at Haryana and how women
[Amit Varma]: are treated there, which also we'll come back to later.
[Amit Varma]: And then later on, you know, when you're in the northeast, you speak about, say, the tribalism
[Amit Varma]: at Imphal, where you write, quote, a sort of trust deficit is palpable in the air here.
[Amit Varma]: Men size each other up warily, seeking answers to the one question preying on their minds.
[Amit Varma]: Who are you?
[Amit Varma]: Are you Indian or tribal?
[Amit Varma]: If tribal, which tribal?
[Amit Varma]: If Naga, which Naga?
[Amit Varma]: Or Meti?
[Amit Varma]: Or are you a Mia, a Bengali Muslim?
[Amit Varma]: The answer to that question is what determines the nature of further engagement.
[Amit Varma]: This breakdown of interpersonal trust means people tend to stick with their own, ensuring
[Amit Varma]: this vicious cycle of identity politics and ethnic strife continues indefinitely, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, of course, not just a problem of the trucking ecosystem, but our society
[Amit Varma]: itself per se.
[Amit Varma]: But is this sort of enhanced or like, I would imagine in trucking, it could go both ways.
[Amit Varma]: Because you all share that common burden of the loneliness of being the long distance
[Amit Varma]: trucker, as it were, that can bring you together despite all the other divisions.
[Amit Varma]: But I can also imagine that why this sort of tribalism can be something that you look
[Amit Varma]: for to find comfort zones, which you find among people like yourself, and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: that can get enhanced.
[Amit Varma]: So what was your sense of this during your travels?
[Guest]: My sense was that, you know, this whole idea of India, India exists in our mind, for the
[Guest]: vast bunch of people, you like an Andhra trucker going to Guwahati, he does not trust the people
[Guest]: he meets over there.
[Guest]: I mean, we are an extremely low trust society.
[Guest]: That is one fundamental thing I learned, I mean, because we are constantly searching
[Guest]: for someone who either they have kinship relationships with, or some sort of loose regional affiliation
[Unknown]: is also fine.
[Guest]: But this trust deficit is just immense and until the last part, until say the 19th century
[Guest]: also, even the early 20th century, people would say that you are going to somewhere
[Guest]: in the Deccan would say, I'm going to Hindustan or like, I'm going to, I mean, that's, that's
[Guest]: the sort of world that existed, right.
[Guest]: And that still does, I mean, truckers are the ones who actually have to travel, otherwise
[Guest]: the others don't need to travel, I mean, either by train or something, but these guys are
[Guest]: constantly in places where they are not amongst their own.
[Guest]: And I would say that that only encourages regionalism, that the whole larger part about
[Guest]: class solidarity, right, that does not come into the picture, any sense of class solidarity
[Guest]: that I tried to find was absent, there was none.
[Guest]: They are highly divided, mostly along the lines of ownership itself, I mean, who will
[Guest]: you rise up against if you want to say, form a union or you want to negotiate for better
[Guest]: wages, who will you rise against, you all have different owners, you can't even speak
[Guest]: the same language.
[Guest]: Even going from Andhra to Tamil Nadu, I struggled, because many of the truckers I've found were
[Guest]: Tamil, I mean, they couldn't understand Telugu, how will these guys, how are these guys ever
[Guest]: expected to come under one banner, then there's of course, caste, religion, all kinds of things,
[Guest]: and this is the prime reason why we don't have any sort of trucker union in India, like
[Guest]: I recently saw the Irishman, and in that I was struck by how powerful a truck union leader
[Guest]: can be, I mean, if that is the sort of potential that exists to build, to bring the country
[Guest]: to a standstill, if you have that sort of influence over a constituency like truckers,
[Guest]: you can be immensely powerful in the country, that's what I realized after watching Irishman,
[Guest]: but that sort of thing is unimaginable in India, the only sort of organization which
[Guest]: claims to represent the truckers, which is AIMTC, All India Motor Transport Congress,
[Guest]: that is also an association of owners, who then pass off their own interests as the interests
[Guest]: of the truckers they employ. So that's how it works in India.
[Amit Varma]: One of the sort of striking anecdotes in your book was where you stop at a dhaba when you're
[Amit Varma]: going up north, you're making the journey up north, and you stop at a dhaba, and there's
[Amit Varma]: a little kid who's running around taking the orders, and you have this trucker taking the
[Amit Varma]: kid on his lap and just playing with his genitals openly in front of everybody while everybody's
[Amit Varma]: laughing and even the kid is squealing and laughing. And you pointed out how it is sort
[Amit Varma]: of a natural thing. It wasn't out of the ordinary there. And you wrote, quote, it's shocking
[Amit Varma]: how outside as liberal havens, attitudes towards children in many parts of India seem to have
[Amit Varma]: ossified in the medieval era. Child sexual abuse is terrifyingly normalized. Unlike America
[Amit Varma]: where childhood is disappearing with the advent of mass TV and internet. It seems the concept
[Amit Varma]: of childhood never really gained mass currency in the first place. Stop quote. And it struck
[Amit Varma]: me that you also elaborated on how this sort of sanctity of childhood is this thing that
[Amit Varma]: is separate from adulthood as something that, you know, carries with it so much innocence
[Amit Varma]: and then gradually you come of age and all of that. And all of that is a luxury that
[Amit Varma]: is only really there even conceptually for elites like us. And for much of India, it's
[Amit Varma]: not the case. For much of India, the way people relate to kids is in a very instrumental way.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, in earlier centuries, it was common to think of children only as a resource.
[Amit Varma]: If you were in a time of famine, you would, you know, sell your kid. And that's one of
[Amit Varma]: the things that you commented on happening here. So is that something you noted sort
[Amit Varma]: of repeatedly while you were going? What do you like? Was it something that struck others
[Amit Varma]: as unusual or that was a normal for them? And is it something that you got used to after
[Amit Varma]: a period in time that, yeah, this is, it's natural for them to think like this and behave
[Amit Varma]: like this?
[Guest]: So, I mean, across Indian highways, all dhabas, literally all dhabas will employ these child
[Guest]: waiters. There will be two, three of them and they will keep running around collecting
[Guest]: orders and delivering stuff. So definitely I did get used to it because there was no
[Guest]: option in the sense, the sort of attitude is so all permeating. In the sense, if you
[Guest]: look there are 10 million child laborers in India at this time. And that is just staggering.
[Guest]: And in spite of say the right to education, which makes it compulsory and also free, there
[Guest]: is still this immense resistance, right? I mean, because of various socio-economic reasons
[Guest]: due to poverty, all these reasons, there is resistance to enroll people, children in school.
[Guest]: And that also derives a feel from a deep cultural way of looking at children itself as these
[Guest]: pure entities. I mean, of course, in middle class circles, it would be scandalous to suggest
[Guest]: that they don't think of their children as innocent beings. But largely they do. I mean,
[Guest]: the government itself is sort of changing the laws to recognize this reality. I mean,
[Guest]: right now, children under the age of 14 are allowed to work in family outfits or they
[Guest]: are actually allowed. After school, you can work in your family business, which can be
[Guest]: anything from PD making or working in the kirana store that your family owns. So right
[Guest]: from that stage, children as this economic resource, that attitude is there. And if we
[Guest]: were forced to even amend the RT to recognize that fact, it says a lot. But yeah, I would
[Guest]: say it's a very difficult thing to really get rid of this attitude. Because as long
[Guest]: as there are economic compulsions, like you always say, it's all incentives. And as long
[Guest]: as there are economic compulsions, it's very unlikely that this attitude will also be removed.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'm reminded of these, you know, the child armies of West Africa, where you
[Amit Varma]: have militias made up of these 10 year olds and 11 year olds responding to a completely
[Amit Varma]: different kind of incentive, which also sort of tells you how our modern notion of children
[Amit Varma]: is so relatively recent. I can also see why, you know, many of sort of what the middle
[Amit Varma]: class would think of as a great unboshed to use your phrase from earlier in this podcast
[Amit Varma]: would be so distrustful of government. Because for example, we speak of the Right to Education
[Amit Varma]: Act, but that is of course, a joke, which does nothing for children, and if anything
[Amit Varma]: made things harder for them. And similarly, I think one of the things that I'm sure these
[Amit Varma]: guys intuitively get is that laws don't do anything, that your lived reality is something
[Amit Varma]: completely different. And, you know, I'd written about this many years ago, all of us are sort
[Amit Varma]: of distressed by child labor, but there was an old Oxfam study on the situation in Bangladesh,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, there were factories which had child workers, and there was international
[Amit Varma]: outrage about that. And about 30,000 child workers were laid off. And, you know, many
[Amit Varma]: of the kids who were laid off actually didn't starve to death, you know, many of the girls
[Amit Varma]: became prostitutes. Similarly, there was a 1995 study by UNICEF, which showed that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a bunch of well meaning peoples began a boycott of carpets made in Nepal using child
[Amit Varma]: labor. And because of that, about 5000 to 7000 Nepali girls turned to prostitution,
[Amit Varma]: because what was otherwise a better option working in a carpet factory was denied to
[Amit Varma]: them. So, you know, we elites often think that hey, an easy option is that you get the
[Amit Varma]: state to legislate and to make a law. And that said, these people will stop treating
[Amit Varma]: their kids badly. But the reality is behind why all these things happen is something sort
[Amit Varma]: of completely different and far more disturbing. Moving on from there, it also, you also commented
[Amit Varma]: at one point on the absence of women in the landscapes that you described, like at one
[Amit Varma]: point you wrote, quote, the first thing that strikes one about the highways of India, and
[Amit Varma]: Rajasthan in particular, is a creepy wholesale absence of women, not a single sighting of
[Amit Varma]: the female form for miles and miles, to the extent that when you finally see one idling
[Amit Varma]: by the road, you tend to assume she's a sex worker, stop quote. And later on, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you point out the exception to this, which is when you go to Nagaland and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that's a little bit different. But otherwise, in the roads of India, you don't, you know,
[Amit Varma]: see women on the highways at all. How does this sort of affect the way that truckers
[Amit Varma]: look at intergender relationships? Are women merely sort of instrumental for them that
[Amit Varma]: when they can get hold of one they want, you know, sex, which they don't otherwise get
[Amit Varma]: so much? How does all of that sort of feature in their mental landscapes?
[Guest]: I would say, you know, this is not just limited to truckers. I mean, so much, so many of the
[Guest]: men I know, right since childhood, they have interacted with women with only instrumental
[Guest]: ends in mind. I mean, it could be as little as taking a notebook during school. But that's
[Guest]: the extent of their interaction with women. And that is the vast majority of men in India.
[Guest]: I mean, they are stunted as far as interacting with the opposite sex. So many social forces
[Guest]: have sort of come together to inculcate this attitude in men. I would say, yes, among truckers,
[Guest]: there is this, in some ways, I would say they do look at women as these exotic objects.
[Guest]: I mean, I wouldn't say it's purely as an object of sex, but someone who is so far removed
[Guest]: from their world, and who will essentially never, never, ever enter their world, except
[Guest]: as a wife, as a long suffering wife, or as a prostitute with whom you have a quick high
[Guest]: rate alliance. But that is the extent of their view about women. And I would say, even so
[Guest]: many of the men I met in IIT, were stunted in similar ways. That is one common thread.
[Guest]: In fact, this whole idea of a masculine world, I mean, I have inhabited many of these masculine
[Guest]: spaces earlier at a military school, later in IIT. And this, even trucking, it's never
[Guest]: totally a masculine world. But that whole, my experience in those worlds was something
[Guest]: that kind of attracted me to this world. I wanted to see what that was like. And that
[Guest]: is one of the reasons I could fit in also, I would say.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's kind of fascinating. And all IIT students listening to this, possibly
[Amit Varma]: would be nodding their head in agreement that it's exactly like that. And that sort of leads
[Amit Varma]: me to wondering that how quick are we to judge other people? Like it would be fair to say,
[Amit Varma]: I think, therefore, that most Indian men are misogynistic and sexist and, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: their kind of approach to the world. And at different levels, they have hatred and lack
[Amit Varma]: of empathy for the other, whoever the other might be in their definition. And you then
[Amit Varma]: have to wonder that how much of this do you actually ascribe to someone being a bad person,
[Amit Varma]: per se, because if this is a world that you've grown up in, and this is all that you know,
[Amit Varma]: and you don't know any other way of looking at someone differently, you may have never
[Amit Varma]: experienced the joy of, you know, that kind of a conversation or that kind of companionship
[Amit Varma]: that could say come with falling in love with someone and then building a life together
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. And it just seems to me that it is so easy for many of us who are much
[Amit Varma]: more fortunate and have more exposure to kind of sit in judgment over them, whether they
[Amit Varma]: are truckers or from IIT. What is though I think people in IIT have less of an excuse
[Amit Varma]: to be a sexist, quite honestly. So what's your feeling on this?
[Guest]: I would say yes, that is, you're on something there. Because even today, 95% of marriages
[Guest]: are arranged marriages. Like you know, since you're a kid, since you develop some hormones,
[Guest]: you know that you are going to be, your parents are going to choose your wife for you. And
[Guest]: that is, it's not even a question over there. For the vast majority, it's not that you have
[Guest]: an option or there's no debate on that question. So that is the first factor which, it invests
[Guest]: every relationship we have with the other sex. It's basically pointless, right? Having
[Guest]: any relationship then because you can't really marry a woman because your parents are going
[Guest]: to choose one for you. And so what basis is there on which to connect? And then it's also
[Guest]: a matter of suspicion in the sense of if you are talking to straying women and the constraints
[Guest]: that are there on the women, I do not even want to get into because I can't imagine the
[Guest]: level of seclusion that they often find themselves in across conservative households in India.
[Guest]: So I would say yes, I feel bad also for men. I mean, it's like you said, a combination
[Guest]: of various forces have conspired to develop this attitude in them. But like you said,
[Guest]: I mean, it's not and it's their responsibility also to overcome those attitudes. I mean,
[Guest]: which many of them do try or are at least forced to try due to this prevailing sensitivity
[Guest]: towards women. It's everywhere, right? Right from the government policies. That sort of
[Guest]: bombardment, I think, can be effective to some level, hopefully.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, though, I feel that even today, a lot of that bombardment is, you know, about empowering
[Amit Varma]: women almost takes a paternalistic and condescending attitude towards it. And you almost, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that you should worship women because they are your mother, they are your wife, always,
[Amit Varma]: you know, setting them in relation to men. And, you know, which, you know, doesn't go
[Amit Varma]: that much further towards sort of respecting their autonomy. And this reminds me of something
[Amit Varma]: interesting that Sringda Poonam said to me when she was on my show, I think over two
[Amit Varma]: years ago. And Sringda has, of course, written this great book called Dreamers about young
[Amit Varma]: Indians. And she pointed out that how in many of the small towns of India, young men are
[Amit Varma]: increasingly bewildered because young women are more assertive about what they want, and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And the men don't have any clue of how to deal with it, because there
[Amit Varma]: is nothing in the culture that teaches you what to do in such situations. I mean, we
[Amit Varma]: think of education as in a narrow sense is coming from your school or college. But really,
[Amit Varma]: education comes at you from your culture, including something like Bollywood, where
[Amit Varma]: wooing a woman is basically always stalking a woman, right? So you have absolutely no
[Amit Varma]: way of sort of figuring out what is a normal relationship. And, you know, that struck me
[Amit Varma]: as interesting. The other aspect of and you know, I spent a bunch of my experience of
[Amit Varma]: reading the book, kind of slowing down and trying to think about what is the interior
[Amit Varma]: life of a trucker? You know, what is he like, like, okay, we can talk about all of these
[Amit Varma]: attitudes, maybe towards children and towards women, we can talk about the loneliness, you
[Amit Varma]: have described in great detail at different points of things that they do within their
[Amit Varma]: trucking, within the ecosystem of their own little truck where somebody might play a lot
[Amit Varma]: of music, and, you know, there'll be different things going on. And what I also started realizing
[Amit Varma]: through the book is that they also build up their own sort of mythologies, as we do all
[Amit Varma]: you know, they have all their ghost stories. It was a fascinating story about the truck
[Amit Varma]: driver who got married to a Bhutani as you put it, that, and I'm just going to relate
[Amit Varma]: that for my listeners, because it's such a great story. And it tells you what, and India
[Amit Varma]: actually has a hoard of great folk tales around these subjects, which most of us aren't even
[Amit Varma]: aware of. But the story basically was a truck drivers going on the road and there is this
[Amit Varma]: ghost basically, a young woman who hitchhikes for a ride and he gives her a lift and then
[Amit Varma]: he falls in love with her and he marries her. And they're living a happy life together.
[Amit Varma]: And then one day his neighbors tell him that listen, we never see her outside the house.
[Amit Varma]: She never like leaves the rubbish outside or whatever. We just don't see her at all.
[Amit Varma]: So he's like, what is a mystery? How does no one else ever spot this woman? So one day
[Amit Varma]: he goes inside his house when he's supposed to be at work. And he sees that he sees a
[Amit Varma]: bunch of disconnected bones in the kitchen cooking something. And she immediately realizes
[Amit Varma]: what has happened and she goes into his arms and she says, I only deceived you because
[Amit Varma]: you love me so much, but now goodbye and she disappears or something. I'm sorry if that's
[Amit Varma]: a digression, but I just found that such a lovely and almost moving story, a truck driver
[Amit Varma]: in love with a ghost. And similarly, there are these other sort of urban legends which
[Amit Varma]: they believe in, like you spoke about how truck drivers are talking about highway robberies
[Amit Varma]: and they point out that in one particular place, these people not only, you know, overtake
[Amit Varma]: you, make you stop and they rob you, but then they also operate on you and take your kidneys.
[Amit Varma]: And that's basically it, which sounds incredibly implausible, but kind of fascinating. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about these interior mythologies, because we all need stories to keep us alive.
[Amit Varma]: And relatively fortunate elite people like you and me will have our own set of stories
[Amit Varma]: that keep us alive, that this is what the politics of today is, X versus Y, that is
[Amit Varma]: a geopolitics. This is what is happening there. But there are sort of internal worlds which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, are formed by entirely different narratives and stories. Tell me what kind
[Amit Varma]: of sense you got of that while on your travels.
[Guest]: Ghost stories definitely. Highways lend themselves very well to ghost stories because all kinds,
[Guest]: I mean, 1.5 lakh people die every year in accidents. Most of them are probably looking
[Guest]: forward to a long life. So they're essentially unfulfilled souls who can then stop the highways
[Guest]: looking for some victim or in vengeance or whatever was done to them. So truck drivers
[Guest]: are often involved in these accidents. So all these things come together. And yeah,
[Guest]: there are a host of stories. I mean, every other place in India will have some particular
[Guest]: spot which is haunted or which is known to be haunted, where you should not drive after
[Guest]: a particular time. So that was widespread right from Andhra to Rajasthan. At the same
[Guest]: time, as far as highway robbery is concerned, I mean, many of them have faced these sorts
[Guest]: of situations. You can't like drive a truck all your life and not be wrong, essentially.
[Guest]: It's a huge part of the highway economy. There are some, essentially, I mean, this is right
[Guest]: since the British era, actually. So many of these nomadic tribes who earlier used to essentially
[Guest]: be, say, wandering entertainers or all kinds of nomadic castes in India, they were forced
[Guest]: to settle. They were branded as criminal tribes and so on. Many of them took on to highway
[Guest]: robbery as a way of survival. So this has been going on since a long time in India.
[Guest]: And truckers also have their various, they know what modus operandi highway robbers use.
[Guest]: Some will slip in a field or some will keep nails. They are quite well versed in that.
[Guest]: Of course, there's nothing they can do about it if that happens. Another interesting sort
[Guest]: of observation I had about their internal world is also linked to religion. There are
[Guest]: various temples, like one in Rajasthan, which I visited. Because of the immense uncertainty
[Guest]: that their job has, you have to rely at some level on the supernatural to lend some level
[Guest]: of certainty. So, various deities across India are known as the patron of truck drivers.
[Guest]: You will find so many trucks parked outside their temple. And at the same time, they are
[Guest]: their own gods. I mean, every truck will have a huge set of photos of Hindu gods. And many
[Guest]: truck drivers will also conduct rituals. As soon as it's dark, they will light an Adarbati.
[Guest]: All of this is meant to ensure their safety, essentially. Because it is an immensely insecure
[Guest]: job. Not just losing your life, there are thieves prowling all around. In India, the
[Guest]: moment you park your truck, you can assume if you leave it for a day or so, many things
[Guest]: will be missing from you. There are petty criminalities rampant in all places in India.
[Guest]: So, essentially, this whole concept of Jugaad, it's like the same extension, except you're
[Guest]: like robbing someone using ingenious means. And so, they have to constantly be on the
[Guest]: watch out for these thieves. So, that is the sort of things that preoccupy them in many
[Guest]: ways, the danger of losing your life. And these stories they come up with reflect many
[Guest]: of these insecurities.
[Amit Varma]: One of the fascinating stories I got from your book was regarding these Sahajdari Sikh
[Amit Varma]: truck drivers that you've taken a ride with and they have a picture of a Baba in the truck
[Amit Varma]: whose face is rather scarred. And when they catch you looking at the photograph, they
[Amit Varma]: tell you the origin story, which struck me as a fantastic origin story, which is that
[Amit Varma]: the Baba looked normal. But then one day, this woman with a scarred face went to him
[Amit Varma]: and said, Baba, please help me. No one will marry me because of my scarred face. So, he
[Amit Varma]: transferred his scars onto himself, which is just such a remarkable story. You know,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned how big a role religion plays in their lives for sort of obvious reasons
[Amit Varma]: as a source of hope and all that. And religion, of course, was famously, you know, once called
[Amit Varma]: the opium of the masses. And actual opium also plays a part in their lives. Like, tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about the role of alcohol and drugs in the trucking life. Because, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: would imagine that when you live a life of such solitude and loneliness on the road all
[Amit Varma]: the time, not getting enough sleep and so on, you know, what do you do for relief? There's
[Amit Varma]: alcohol, there's drugs. You've described in your book about the connection between alcohol
[Amit Varma]: and sex, of course, that sometimes when they, you know, prostitution rackets will often
[Amit Varma]: run along the bushes where, you know, pimps will shine a light at night and they'll know
[Amit Varma]: they have to stop there. And sometimes they'll get robbed, but sometimes they'll actually
[Amit Varma]: see a sex worker there and the pimp will also have some daru with him in case because they
[Amit Varma]: often need alcohol to sort of get all their parts working as it were. What's the role
[Amit Varma]: of that alcohol and drugs sort of play in the lives of these people?
[Guest]: So I'll take it one by one. So to start with alcohol, for instance, I will, I would say
[Guest]: that its usage is exaggerated in the minds of the ordinary population with regard to
[Guest]: our truck drivers. The majority of the truck drivers I met told me that they knew it puts
[Guest]: their life at risk and that drinking and driving is dangerous. So there was that awareness
[Guest]: throughout with one exception. So I must have interacted with hundreds of truckers and hitchhiked
[Guest]: with around 30 to 50 of them. And nowhere did I see any consumption while on the road.
[Guest]: So that is an unfair stereotype, which I would like to clarify for your listeners. And with
[Guest]: regard to opium, it is used in certain parts of the country, like Punjab and Rajasthan,
[Guest]: parts of Haryana. And it's interesting that India actually is one of the few countries
[Guest]: which is legally allowed to cultivate opium for medicinal purposes. All these extracts
[Guest]: like codeine, which goes into cough syrups, they are all derived from opium, which is
[Guest]: legally cultivated in parts of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and UP. So it is from these
[Guest]: areas that the Bukki, that is poppy husk is sold, which is actually legal in many parts
[Guest]: of the country. In Rajasthan, for example, you have government thekas which sell this
[Guest]: and many truck drivers patronize these thekas. So in these parts, there is quite a dependence
[Guest]: on opium, especially in Punjab. I mean, I asked anecdotally various truck drivers, what
[Guest]: percentage of truck drivers we think take opium and it was unanimously over around 75%.
[Guest]: So in Punjab, the sort of opium addiction we see is quite high compared to the rest
[Guest]: of the country. One of the truckers I also traveled with, was a quite a heavy user of
[Guest]: the Bukki. And he would rationalize it saying that this Bukki makes me scratch myself. And
[Guest]: that is a giveaway trait of an opium addict, which I found out when I was going around
[Guest]: with them. And that helps me stay awake and, you know, keep all these inhuman hours. So
[Guest]: that was how he rationalized it. They found kind of interesting. But at the same time,
[Guest]: it is extremely addictive. The withdrawal symptoms are deadly. The driver I met, he
[Guest]: himself had admitted himself twice to a Nasha Mukti Kendra and he couldn't beat the habit
[Guest]: in spite of his attempts. So it's really a dangerous sort of drug which might seem its
[Guest]: effects are quite mild. But the long term effects on your body is very striking. I mean,
[Guest]: the face becomes gaunt and your body sort of shrivels away. And it's quite easy to make
[Guest]: out someone who is dependent on opium, you know, once you get an eye for that sort of
[Amit Varma]: thing. Yeah, and it's interesting how sort of, I mean, drugs, of course, are in the news
[Amit Varma]: these days and sitting in Mumbai, we shouldn't possibly not comment too much upon them. But
[Amit Varma]: it's interesting how a lot of things which could be considered contraband, or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sort of in the narcotic family are actually normalized parts of our cultures. And that's
[Amit Varma]: fine like hung, for example, or, you know, in I'm half Bengali. So a vegetable I grew
[Amit Varma]: up eating was posto, alu posto and posto is made with poppy seeds and, you know, so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there are different levels of damage that they can do to the person. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think any Bengali will say that posto ever did him any harm. And if we speak of
[Amit Varma]: being addicted to Bengali food, it's an entirely harmless sort of sense. In your book, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out the gradations of this where some of it is just recreational and you use
[Amit Varma]: and it's cool. And it's not a big deal. But some of the sort of the harder forms of the
[Amit Varma]: drug can, you know, really damage people. And how is it looked upon in the culture?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there a realization among truckers that there is that line? And, you know, those
[Amit Varma]: who cross it just can't help it. I mean, it's like addiction. I mean, what do you do? You
[Amit Varma]: go a little too far down that road, and then you're sort of stuck or, you know, are a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the milder forms like bookie, for example, not treated as a drug at all. I mean, it's
[Guest]: just something that you have like one per hour or whatever. Yes, you're right. I mean,
[Guest]: there is an acknowledgement of that line among many truck drivers. For example, one of the
[Guest]: truckers I traveled with his younger brother had died due to addiction to the harder form,
[Guest]: which is called chitta in Punjab. So they very well know that these particular forms
[Guest]: which are often synthetic in nature and recent introductions to the landscape in bookies
[Guest]: has been taken since centuries in Punjab. And if farmhands used to use it, I have used
[Guest]: it throughout historically, as a way to keep up their spirits by toiling in the fields.
[Guest]: So there is definitely that acceptance. But yeah, I mean, often what happens is that the
[Guest]: kalasis pick up these habits from their ustads, you know, if and then once you're, you're
[Guest]: biologically addicted to it, then it is in spite of your best efforts, it is very difficult
[Guest]: to come up with to come out of that habit. And since your lifestyle also kind of encourages
[Guest]: this the consumption, I mean, it's a monotonous job, like I said, we need to break the monotony.
[Guest]: And this is a sort of crutch you come to rely upon to somehow survive these gruelling conditions.
[Guest]: And that's what happens with many truckers. But yes, there is that line in their mind
[Amit Varma]: for sure. You know, an interesting observation you made in your book, which I keep making
[Amit Varma]: all the time. So when I saw it in your book, I'm like, it was another come to my arms Rajat
[Amit Varma]: kind of moment, which is when you speak about India inhabiting different centuries simultaneously,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, I had always meant in a sense of social attitudes that we are in the 1920s
[Amit Varma]: and 21st century, especially if you see the way women are treated. So there, I would say
[Amit Varma]: we haven't even hit the 21st, mostly 19th and 20th, except in some select Twitter pockets.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, it struck me that that line also that distinction also holds and I'm just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud as we're speaking about the subject, that it also holds in terms of what
[Amit Varma]: kind of substances you use in the culture and what the science says. For example, there
[Amit Varma]: are many substances we use today, for example, coffee, in a manner of speaking, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it could be said that I'm addicted to coffee. And coffee is actually more addictive than
[Amit Varma]: many of the softer drugs that are actually banned. And some some would argue it's more
[Amit Varma]: harmful as well. And also what I sometimes do, though I haven't taken it today, but what
[Amit Varma]: I often take before recordings where I really need to focus is a cognitive drug called Modafinil.
[Amit Varma]: India is one of the few places where it's actually legal over the counter. So it's called
[Amit Varma]: Modeler 100, not named after a Prime Minister. And I find it sort of remarkable. I know a
[Amit Varma]: lot of people who also take it though I would advise listeners not to try it just because
[Amit Varma]: I do. But I just find that it is, you know, while coffee is a blunt tool, it's a sharp
[Amit Varma]: tool, it just keeps me really focused and mentally fresh. Even when I'm physically very
[Amit Varma]: tired, the one should take it early in the morning, if you take it in the evening, you're
[Amit Varma]: not going to sleep for the whole night, definitely. So it's kind of interesting that on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand, you have science going in one way, where we are getting revelations about the efficacy
[Amit Varma]: and the danger and the addictiveness of different drugs. And on the other hand, you have laws
[Amit Varma]: which are kind of behind the science, where, you know, maybe there are a few decades behind
[Amit Varma]: the science and not really caught up with the science entirely. And then there is culture
[Amit Varma]: which is on its own long, slow continuum where, you know, people have what they have. And
[Amit Varma]: that's also completely sort of distant from all of these. And as I'm thinking aloud, I'll
[Amit Varma]: ask you to join me in thinking aloud that even apart from this context, can you sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, what are the different kinds of things that come to your mind where you
[Amit Varma]: talk about the different centuries that India inhabits, not just sort of in this context,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, because one could say that you actually took an effort to step out of your
[Amit Varma]: sort of elite educated middle class bubble and sort of go around. So you know, any observations
[Guest]: on this?
[Guest]: You know, one constituency in India, which really comes to my mind when you talk about
[Guest]: this are the nomadic tribes of India. They constitute around 5 to 10 crores of our population.
[Guest]: But so many of them have not even been, they're not on electoral rolls. Many of them don't
[Guest]: have any identity documents. So they are essentially invisibilized citizens of our country. I mean,
[Guest]: and because they're not even on the electoral rolls, there is no sort of concerted effort
[Guest]: to raise their standards of living or some targeted schemes to further welfare. I mean,
[Guest]: there are but they're not as focused because they do not form a core political constituency.
[Guest]: So many of these nomadic tribes, they live a lifestyle that is essentially unchanged
[Guest]: from centuries, essentially. So, for example, I met the Gujjars and Bakarwals while I was
[Guest]: traveling in Kashmir. And their lifestyle, I mean, they constitute what around 15 to
[Guest]: 20% of Kashmir's population altogether. And they practice the right of transhumans, which
[Guest]: is essentially taking your flocks up the alpine pastures, and then during the summer and then
[Guest]: in the winter, you come down again. So their entire livelihood is derived from the wool
[Guest]: and the dairy products and so on. So this is just one example whom I happened to encounter.
[Guest]: But across India, in Maharashtra, for example, you have the Dhangars. India has such a huge
[Guest]: livestock population, right? And who are the ones who are raising them? Many of them belong
[Guest]: to these nomadic tribes who are wandering across the landscape, especially in Deccan,
[Guest]: you will find many of these tribes. So what century are they really living in? If you
[Guest]: really come to think of it? I mean, they will have the mobile phone, of course. I mean,
[Guest]: mobile phone has become a proxy for modernity, right? In our minds that if someone has a
[Guest]: mobile phone, then yeah, he's in the modern world. But I wonder if that is really a fair
[Guest]: statement to make, because all other aspects of your life, all the other comforts which
[Guest]: we take for granted, and even the way you're living your life, you're pitching tents in
[Guest]: the middle of nowhere, you are constantly moving. This is essentially unchanged for
[Guest]: so many years. So I mean, this is one example that comes to my mind, when we say that India
[Guest]: inhabits multiple centuries.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's interesting, you talk about how, you know, when that the seasonal migration
[Amit Varma]: of the Gujarat is happening, and you're on your way to Kashmir at that time on that leg
[Amit Varma]: of the trip. And they're all hitchhiking by the side of the road trying to grab a lift.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, it struck me that, you know, for these guys, a truck is almost like
[Amit Varma]: a time machine of sorts, that otherwise, they're sort of walking with their livestock, but
[Amit Varma]: just for a moment, they use the 20th century to get a little quicker. And like you said,
[Amit Varma]: you know, some of them, if they have mobile phones, they also have a slice of the 21st
[Amit Varma]: century in their palms. But it's just a gadget. I mean, you know, what do you do with it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, where does sort of the rest of the 21st century, so to say, come from? That's
[Amit Varma]: that's, yeah, that's a lot of food for thought there. And therefore, we shall take a commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and think about it.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read, but also wants to write better? If
[Amit Varma]: so, I have something for you. Since April this year, I've been teaching an online course
[Amit Varma]: called the art of clear writing. Four webinars spread out over four Saturdays, in which I
[Amit Varma]: share whatever I've learned about the craft and practice of writing over 25 years as a
[Amit Varma]: professional writer. The course also contains many writing exercises, discussions on email
[Amit Varma]: and WhatsApp and much interactivity. It costs rupees 10,000 or $150. You can check out the
[Amit Varma]: details at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. This link will be in the show notes. If you
[Amit Varma]: want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the page, then
[Amit Varma]: the art of clear writing might be just what you need. October batches begin on Saturday,
[Amit Varma]: October 3rd. So hurry and register before then. IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Rajat Obekar, author of the
[Amit Varma]: delightful book, Truck Day India. And, you know, I have to say that, for those who are
[Amit Varma]: listening, I had mentioned at the start of the show that we started an hour late because
[Amit Varma]: of technical glitches, where further technical glitches actually made us stop the recording
[Amit Varma]: and resume two days later. So right after the question about alcohol and drugs, we had,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a problem which made us sort of go offline. And now you know, three days later,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, the first half was recorded on Monday. Now we are back on Thursday and we finished
[Amit Varma]: at answer taken a break and we are here again. And this is sort of the first time it's happening
[Amit Varma]: to me, but I thought it's apt because this is kind of both the life of truckers would
[Amit Varma]: be like, which is the subject of Rajat's book, interminable delays and so on. And also Rajat
[Amit Varma]: is joining the civil services. So maybe this is apt for that reason as well. So you know,
[Amit Varma]: one part of the book which sort of interest, he stayed silent, but he's laughing by the
[Amit Varma]: way I can see on zoom. So one part of the book which really sort of interested me, Rajat
[Amit Varma]: was also about where you talk about how over time like we've already spoken about how they
[Amit Varma]: sort of have a distinctive culture of their own, how they develop mythologies of their
[Amit Varma]: own. And part of the book, which I really enjoyed was about how they own develop their
[Amit Varma]: own vocabulary with their own aphorisms and sayings and all that. For example, one example
[Amit Varma]: of that which you give, of course, is Majboori ka naam Mahatma Gandhi hai. And then within
[Amit Varma]: the book, there were these sort of delightful little throwaway lines, like I'll read out
[Amit Varma]: a couple of them, which I really liked. There's one, which cautions the drivers to drive carefully.
[Amit Varma]: And the line is, quote, dheere dheere chaloge, baar baar miloge, tez chaloge, seede haridwar
[Amit Varma]: miloge, stop quote. And then there's another one, which seems sort of almost a sad acceptance
[Amit Varma]: of their lot, where they say, quote, ameeron ki zindagi chalti hai biscuit aur cake se,
[Amit Varma]: driveron ki zindagi, steering aur brakes se, stop quote. And there's another one where
[Amit Varma]: they are sort of reflecting on marriage, where they say, keechar mein jaoge, pyaar dhona
[Amit Varma]: parega, driver se shadi karoge, toh rona parega, stop quote. And these are, you know, both
[Amit Varma]: they are humorous, they are reflective, they're even self-deprecatory. You must be familiar
[Amit Varma]: with a lot of, you know, this stuff there. What was your sense of sort of navigating
[Amit Varma]: the lingo? And what kind of sense did it give you again, to go back to the subject we discussed
[Amit Varma]: earlier of their interior lives, like do some of these become cliches or tropes that come
[Amit Varma]: up again and again? And, you know, and is it often in terms of language, and this is
[Amit Varma]: a broader reflection than just beyond the trucking life, that sometimes can such lingo
[Amit Varma]: and such vocabulary and can such tropes offer sort of the comfort of familiarity to people
[Amit Varma]: who, you know, might crave that?
[Guest]: So I mean, these sort of aphorisms, they came up quite again and again, through my journey.
[Guest]: And many of these are passed down from Ustad to Khalasi. I mean, it's part of the initiation
[Guest]: into the world of trucking and into the world of the highway, because the highway, for them
[Guest]: is this unknown beast, right, which they have to constantly negotiate, it keeps throwing
[Guest]: up these challenges for them, which they have to overcome time and again. So these aphorisms
[Guest]: also serve as sort of a tutorial in some ways to about how to navigate the highway. At the
[Guest]: same time, it is also a way to look at their own lives, which are not the lifestyle is
[Guest]: extremely gruelling. So they seek consolation in these aphorisms. I mean, of course, in
[Guest]: the south, there must be different versions of these, which I could not really appreciate.
[Guest]: But in Rajasthan and Punjab, these aphorisms I have developed over the years, and young
[Guest]: Khalasis are especially fond of recounting them when you ask them. So that is how I learned
[Guest]: about them from the Khalasis mainly. The Ustads generally are a bit of know-it-alls. They
[Guest]: are the ones who are a bit more reserved usually. The Khalasis love to talk and they're young
[Guest]: chaps, I mean, they are hardly 20-21. And they're quite open about their whatever they've
[Guest]: learned so far.
[Amit Varma]: And is there a sort of a difference between the way the Khalasis and the Ustads approach
[Amit Varma]: you? And also, is there a difference in the way that they approach life? Like we spoke
[Amit Varma]: before the break about how, you know, the Ustads, there is almost a sense of poignancy
[Amit Varma]: because the status of the truck driver has become more lowly over the course of their
[Amit Varma]: careers. And there would also be the sense of hopelessness where they realize that it's
[Amit Varma]: a dead end street. Are the Khalasis also like that? Or are the Khalasis more sort of ambitious
[Amit Varma]: and looking beyond trucking and so on? What was your experience of that?
[Guest]: Yeah, the Ustads tend to be more jaded. They are more jaded about life. The best part of
[Guest]: their lives is behind them. And there's nothing as such they have to look forward to except
[Guest]: driving the truck. The Khalasis, they are just taking in the sight, you know, they're
[Guest]: traveling across India, they're learning new stuff. For a couple of years, they're just
[Guest]: traveling. So they are on a learning curve, if you could put it that way. So they are
[Guest]: more hopeful and their worldview is also much wider. For example, one Khalasi I met in Nagaland,
[Guest]: he used to listen to Rihanna, Justin Bieber, and all these folks. He was quite influenced
[Guest]: by American culture. So you can see that difference. I mean, this guy was probably a couple of
[Guest]: years down the line, he'll probably take up something else, because he has access to the
[Guest]: English language to some degree. His worldview is much, much wider than that of the Ustads.
[Guest]: So I did see that difference.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's interesting, his worldview would be wider than his Ustad who is driving
[Amit Varma]: a truck. But at the same time, his worldview would be wider than wherever he's coming from,
[Amit Varma]: because he's traveled all around. So in a sense, he's transcending both of those contexts.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting thing that you pointed out in the book, and which didn't actually
[Amit Varma]: take me by surprise at all, is the enormous warmth and generosity with which you were
[Amit Varma]: treated. Like you've spoken about how, at different times, they would not allow you
[Amit Varma]: to pay for anything. In one case, after you started the journey, they actually drove into
[Amit Varma]: this dhaba, which you immediately knew was much more upscale than they would otherwise
[Amit Varma]: go to. And they ordered a lavish meal with two paneer dishes and a lot of tandoori roti
[Amit Varma]: and all that. And they insisted on paying for it, and said, ki aap toh humare mehman
[Amit Varma]: hai, even though they're spending many times a day's normal allowance for food on that.
[Amit Varma]: And how did you know, where do you think that comes from? Because, you know, there is this,
[Amit Varma]: I often feel that we in the middle class and we elites are sort of, you know, much less
[Amit Varma]: generous and much less open in that sense than the people, you know, the middle class
[Amit Varma]: will refer to as a great unwashed. As you put it earlier in your episode, I don't mean
[Amit Varma]: to imply that either you or I listen to refer to them like that. Like I remember when I
[Amit Varma]: first went to Pakistan to cover the cricket tour in 2006. And I was covering the tour
[Amit Varma]: for the Guardian and Crick Info. And the first time we were in Lahore, we needed to buy some
[Amit Varma]: pencil cells for our recorders and all that. And two or three of us went to a store, and
[Amit Varma]: we bought a whole bunch of supplies. And then we asked for the bill and we were chit chatting.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, we mentioned we are from India, we've come to cover the tour, everything
[Amit Varma]: changes, you know, until then, it's all transactional. And, you know, whatever the moment we say
[Amit Varma]: they're from India, just a warmth just overflows, and they refuse to take money. And I know
[Amit Varma]: that's a cliche that they refuse to sort of take money from you. But we experience this
[Amit Varma]: like with one minor exception of a small incident somewhere, we sort of experienced this everywhere
[Amit Varma]: we went, you know, the generosity of the common person to what someone he does not need to
[Amit Varma]: be generous to someone who is probably, you know, much better off than him. And as you
[Amit Varma]: said, you experience this as Mehman Nawazi of the trucker towards someone who's, you
[Amit Varma]: know, much better off who's come from another world and is going to go back to that world
[Amit Varma]: soon. What did you make of that? Was it as ubiquitous as you know, the sense that I got
[Amit Varma]: from the book? And how did it kind of make you feel? And did you then get conscious about
[Amit Varma]: not exploiting it about, you know, taking a step back and sort of not, you know, all
[Guest]: of that?
[Guest]: Amit, yeah, about the middle class, the attitudes are definitely different in terms of how you
[Guest]: look at money, how you look at strangers. So, what I saw among many truckers, the attitude
[Guest]: was that the money keeps coming and going. And they often refer to themselves also as
[Guest]: Dildar, as someone who is not tight fisted in any way. So, that is the sort of mythology
[Guest]: that they have, some of them have constructed around their lifestyle. And that sort of generosity,
[Guest]: I think, is tied up with that particular self conception. Among the middle class, I would
[Guest]: say there is relatively less openness and generosity, in my experience. And if it is
[Guest]: generosity, it is often in the mold of charity. So, there's a conscious tendency to look at
[Guest]: generosity as charity or something that accrues merit. And there is a certain selfish intent
[Guest]: behind it also, in terms of where you will get something in the next life or you will
[Guest]: be reborn or whatever, these particular concerns are there. But unselfconscious, pure generosity
[Guest]: and the kind I found was something I do not expect to find among the middle class. As
[Guest]: far as how it made me feel, it made me extremely conscious. Many times I refused also, I mean,
[Guest]: you have to step your foot down and when such things happen, which happened all the time.
[Guest]: In the south, I felt things were a bit more transactional in terms of the attitudes of
[Guest]: the truckers also. Because that whole self conception of the lifestyle, I mean, what
[Guest]: I saw was that in the south, it is more of a livelihood rather than a lifestyle. So,
[Guest]: in the north, it's, we actually consider it as this is my style. And this is how we do
[Guest]: it. In the south, the truck is more of an asset which is meant to be monetized. And
[Guest]: so for example, one trucker I met, he was used to take on hitchhikers like anything
[Guest]: like there were 10 people sitting in the same truck by the end of the journey in the truck
[Guest]: cabin, or a couple of them with their backs to the windshield, there were rice sacks and
[Guest]: the entire truck was full. Also, that is how he earns an extra buck. I mean, I admire his
[Guest]: entrepreneurs. I mean, though it might be illegal to fill people in like that. But he
[Guest]: is trying to make some money out of it. And because how much does his job really make
[Guest]: in terms of salaries. So that spirit I admired. In the north, I didn't find this hitchhiking
[Guest]: seem to be too much except in UP. UP was insane. I mean, I didn't write about it in the book.
[Guest]: But I hitchhiked from Delhi to Kanpur. And I was standing by the side of the road with
[Guest]: my bag and I was just holding my finger out. And I see in five minutes, there are around
[Guest]: six or seven people around me like this. They've seen that over this guy, apparently he knows
[Guest]: how to find whatever vehicle they didn't even know I was going in a truck. And finally when
[Guest]: the truck stopped, I see that there are already two or three people inside. And all these
[Guest]: six or seven people with me are also getting in. So the sort of overpopulation there is
[Guest]: in UP means that not just buses and trains, even trucks are overcrowded. I mean, there
[Guest]: was not a single truck which I got in which was not already filled with people. So that
[Guest]: was quite insane. Nowhere else did I find that happening. So that was quite interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's also also sort of interesting. I mean, I'm just wondering now you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how truck drivers see themselves as Dildar. And to some extent, I'm wondering if that
[Amit Varma]: also comes from the self image that they build around themselves, that someone in the south
[Amit Varma]: will build a different kind of self image where it's a livelihood and he's doing it
[Amit Varma]: for that reason. And that's, you know, and whereas someone in the north, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: will consider it part of their lifestyle or who they are, and especially the way the Punjabi
[Amit Varma]: sees himself as being Dildar and being so, you know, exquisite mehmannawazi and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. You know, there's also a section where you speak about Sikhs in trucking, where you
[Amit Varma]: write, quote, interestingly, in North America, as in India, the Sikhs have become a dominant
[Amit Varma]: presence in trucking. I wonder if the long tryst with migration has something to do with
[Amit Varma]: why Punjabis took to driving trucks with such enthusiasm, because what is trucking but a
[Amit Varma]: form of constant displacement, stop quote. And that gives a sense that for many Punjabis,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just trucking and getting on there is a much more natural than it is for people
[Amit Varma]: perhaps elsewhere, because so many of them do it. And then that just creates a cycle,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's a virtuous cycle or a vicious cycle, one really can't comment, it depends
[Amit Varma]: on their circumstances, trucking might be the best thing they have available to them.
[Amit Varma]: So it might even be a virtuous cycle. And apart from that, just the sort of the lifestyle
[Amit Varma]: connotations, the sort of all of that, the other sort of part of your book, which I found
[Amit Varma]: quite fascinating was the relationship between the trucker and the truck, like which is very
[Amit Varma]: different from the relationship between anyone else who drives a vehicle and his vehicle,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like I would not feel for my car the way all truckers would feel about their
[Amit Varma]: trucks. And you spent a bunch of time in this place called Sirhind where they actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, build trucks. Tell me a little bit about what is that relationship between the
[Guest]: trucker and the truck.
[Guest]: So I just speak about the Punjabis a bit before I get to your question. So there, the history
[Guest]: of Punjab is quite tied up with that of trucking in India. So after partition, many Sikhs and
[Guest]: Khatris from West Pakistan who were resettled in these refugee colonies, many of them spread
[Guest]: out from there. And they started driving trucks that and this was also tied up with the World
[Guest]: War Two, which had just ended and many military issue trucks had ended up in India at that
[Guest]: time. And these were then refashioned by the new owners and personalized in some ways.
[Guest]: And that is the close linkage. And often what happens is that whenever Punjabis go driving
[Guest]: trucks, some entrepreneurial chap will set up a Punjabi dhaba also. This is also the
[Guest]: reason why Punjabi food has become the sort of pan Indian food. And when we say Indian
[Guest]: food, it's often Punjabi, Mughlai, that sort of thing. And there is a link with close link
[Guest]: with trucking over there. Why we see that. And as far as your question goes, this whole
[Guest]: personalization is linked to the emergence of centers like Sirhind. Because firstly,
[Guest]: let's speak a little about why Indian trucks and trucks in the subcontinent are so colorful.
[Guest]: What is the outlet? Why is this so specific to the subcontinent? So it is linked to the
[Guest]: history of goods transport in India. Across history, there have been certain communities
[Guest]: like the Banjaras and so on who were tasked with transporting goods. And their tradition
[Guest]: was to decorate their animals. So the camels, their hair would be braided, the bullock carts
[Guest]: would be decorated, the bullocks themselves would have like tassels hanging around their
[Guest]: ears. And these are the same tassels which we see hanging around trucks also. And we
[Guest]: also even see so one text I read dating back to the 10th or 12th century about how a ship
[Guest]: was decorated during that time. We don't find too many references to this sort of thing,
[Guest]: but I found one and all the motifs like from the peacocks to the eagles, I mean, everything
[Guest]: was repeated. So many of these things you can find in a 10th, 12th century text on how
[Guest]: to paint a ship. And all these motifs are recurring in truck art today. So I found it
[Guest]: incredibly fascinating. I mean, this is not just some modern phenomenon, though its history
[Guest]: has not been adequately documented. And it's not possible to document it as much because
[Guest]: of its informal nature. But it has a long history. In Pakistan, for example, there has
[Guest]: been a bit more documentation of truck art, because their truck art is much more intricate.
[Guest]: And it's much more colorful. It's insane. I mean, you must have seen when you went to
[Guest]: Pakistan. But so there we see some historical accounts of how when the artisans of princely
[Guest]: states in Rajasthan and Gujarat, many of them Muslims migrated to Karachi after partition.
[Guest]: And there they started, they transferred their skills to trucking. And that's how these sort
[Guest]: of motifs came up in Pakistan. In India, unfortunately, we don't have as much record. But Sirhind,
[Guest]: it was definitely a fascinating place to be in. And what that showed me was how much care
[Guest]: a trucker puts into decorating his vehicle. And like you said, like the proprietor of
[Guest]: that particular establishment told me, it's like choosing a life partner. So a lot of
[Guest]: thought needs to be put into how you own the cabin. So you are because you're going to
[Guest]: spend like eight out of 12 months of your life there, probably more. So it is much more
[Guest]: it's like your home and you there should not be any compromises on that end. So the Punjabi
[Guest]: and the Kashmiri truckers, especially the Kashmiri truckers would invest a lot. When
[Guest]: I visited, it was around two lakhs in just decorating their truck, which is a lot. So
[Guest]: yes, this says a lot about the relationship between a truck and a trucker. So often, they
[Guest]: refer to the truck itself as a she or as a demure woman or a bride. So it's like, yeh
[Guest]: meri hai, yeh meri wali hai. So all these references come up where there is the personification
[Guest]: of the truck. It's given some human qualities. And ultimately, it does pay off. I mean, investing
[Guest]: a loss, this amount of money and time. So they stay for one month in that establishment
[Guest]: until the whole truck is made, all the design is done. One month they just wait there, supervise
[Guest]: the building of the truck. That is the amount of devotion and care they put. And I don't
[Guest]: think you will find that anywhere else in the world apart from the Indian subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: One of the TILs in your book and it changed the way I will look at trucks forever is that
[Amit Varma]: when a manufacturer sells a truck to a trucker, he's basically selling the chassis, right?
[Amit Varma]: And the rest of it, the body of the truck is something that is built and customized.
[Amit Varma]: And like you pointed out, there are some places like South India, I think you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: where it's very functional and they don't really care so much. But up north, the Kashmiris
[Amit Varma]: and the Punjabis and different cultures, they'll have the truck done up just the way they want.
[Amit Varma]: Like you quoted Mewa Singh who runs that establishment in Sirindh saying that this is like sort of
[Amit Varma]: buying a home and like choosing a life partner, but also like buying a home where you want
[Amit Varma]: every aspect of it sort of personalized and customized exactly as you want all the way
[Amit Varma]: down to hidden compartments. So what do they do with hidden compartments?
[Guest]: So hidden compartments are often used to hide contraband. Like for example, one chap I traveled
[Guest]: with used to hide his bookie in there, whatever for his personal consumption. I'm sure there's
[Guest]: a lot of smuggling also that happens in India. It definitely happens. And a lot of this is
[Guest]: facilitated through these hidden compartments and so on because they are useful, right?
[Guest]: I mean, when the state is often out there to take money from you on various pretexts,
[Guest]: if there's anything you need to hide, which is very likely you will have the hidden compartments
[Guest]: come in handy. But I'll also like talk a bit about the whole process. I didn't get into
[Guest]: it, the process of building the truck itself. So from the chassis, there are around say
[Guest]: 10 to 15 different types of artisans who are at work trying to sort of build a skeletal
[Guest]: framework first around the chassis. And then you will have the radium tape, the electrician,
[Guest]: the painter, the cabin maker, the welder, the artisan who will cut the chadar and in
[Guest]: all these geometrical shapes. So it's a very specialized job. And often in Punjab, for
[Guest]: example, I saw that literally all of these artisans were from Bihar. And in Sirindh,
[Guest]: the place I visited, all of them were from one district, which is Madhubani district
[Guest]: in Bihar, which itself has a rich heritage of folk art. The Madhubani paintings are quite
[Guest]: famous. So it's the traditional skill in that region. And many of them come to Punjab to
[Guest]: work in these establishments. And I stayed there for a couple of days. And it was a revelation.
[Guest]: It was a lot of fun just talking to these chaps, talking to truck artists, trying to
[Guest]: see how he how he has learned these things. And there also we find that whole Ustad Khalas.
[Guest]: I mean, it's like much of India actually runs on these informal apprenticeship networks.
[Guest]: I mean, formal training because it's not very well established. Everything that most Indians
[Guest]: have learned, it has been from some generous person, either a relative or someone you know,
[Guest]: who will very generously impart his skills so that you can pick it up. And that was quite
[Amit Varma]: interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also, you know, struck by a part of your book where you talk about how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the roads of India itself are changing, like there is an ecosystem out there. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there are all these different moving subcultures, as it were traveling through
[Amit Varma]: these roads. But then at one point while traveling through Gujarat, you made the observation
[Amit Varma]: quote, the highways in Gujarat are so slick, they've attained the soulless efficiency of
[Amit Varma]: the autobahns and freeways of the West, stop quote. And elsewhere, you know, you have spoken
[Amit Varma]: about how at different parts of the road, you have different dhabas catering to different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of clientele like for Punjabis and so on. But at the same time, you talk about how
[Amit Varma]: some of these flyovers and so on are just sort of passing them by. For example, at one
[Amit Varma]: point, when you stopped at a dhaba, you say quote, business for many of these dhabas,
[Amit Varma]: especially in Gujarat has been slow. Earlier, they occupied prime real estate right by the
[Amit Varma]: highway. But the spree of flyover construction has bypassed many of them. Now, cars and trucks
[Amit Varma]: just zoom above them, oblivious to their presence, stop quote. So is there sort of, and I know
[Amit Varma]: that there are always these trade-offs and we can both bemoan the loss of the richness
[Amit Varma]: of this cultural diversity in the form of the different types of dhabas. And on the
[Amit Varma]: other hand, there is an increased efficiency, the quicker travel times, which also add sort
[Amit Varma]: of say unseen elements to the lives of the truckers and the drivers. What sense did you
[Amit Varma]: get of this from the truckers themselves? Like, is this loss something that they bemoan?
[Amit Varma]: Did you feel that there is some color being lost here, which is, you know, which we don't
[Amit Varma]: appreciate enough? And, you know, what were your thoughts?
[Guest]: I would say the effect has largely been positive. Many truckers are happy and they can, they're
[Guest]: very conscious, they can see the fact that roads have improved so much over the last
[Guest]: 10-15 years, especially the national highways. So as one trucker put it to me, he says that
[Guest]: it's become very easy for us. Most of the cities, we can, there's a bypass which they
[Guest]: have made from which we can avoid the city itself. And almost all of the villages have
[Guest]: flyovers. So our job is just to drive and there are not too many hurdles in our way.
[Guest]: And that enables them to do more business because the turnaround time reduces and improves
[Guest]: their income overall. And generally, it's a good thing, I would say. Of course, there
[Guest]: is a lot of resistance to these things. You know, interestingly, when I visited my native
[Guest]: village while on this trip in the middle, on the Karnataka coast, and what I found there
[Guest]: was there are protests happening by the locals, because they are building a flyover which
[Guest]: will bypass their main market by the highway. So by the highway, they have like all these
[Guest]: shops and stuff, but the government is planning to build a flyover which will bypass and there
[Guest]: is ferocious resistance to this. And we will not allow this flyover to be built. So you
[Guest]: see the kind of challenges the government also has to overcome to bring this so called
[Guest]: development. And this loss of heritage, etc. That's when all this comes up, right? When
[Guest]: all these traditional establishments have been there for decades, find themselves suddenly
[Guest]: bypassed. So that aspect is there. But I will say it's largely been positive.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on to, I mean, we've spoken a lot about Punjab and Kashmir and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. I found your section on the Northeast interesting, because interesting for reasons
[Amit Varma]: that it told me about a lot more than just a trucking life. It also gave me a sense of
[Amit Varma]: how the Northeast is almost such a unique part of India, if we can call it a part of
[Amit Varma]: India at all. Like, you know, to sort of go back to my trip of Pakistan, my impression
[Amit Varma]: through traveling through Lahore, Karachi, Islamabad, all these places, it was just like
[Amit Varma]: the signs were in Urdu, but culturally, I never felt away from home. And the one place
[Amit Varma]: where I did feel away from home was when I went to Peshawar and that frontier, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and travel down the Khyber Pass. And there, you know, everybody looks different. And they're
[Amit Varma]: speaking sort of a different language Pashto instead of Urdu. And there, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: sense was kind of different, not unfriendly, not in that sense, not hostile, but just different.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought that, you know, that similar difference and it's very interesting. So since
[Amit Varma]: this is a show that welcomes digression, I'll take one of my own that, you know, one of
[Amit Varma]: the enterprising journalists I was traveling with, he managed to do some jugaad and he
[Amit Varma]: got these guys who would take us right to the edge of the Khyber Pass where the border
[Amit Varma]: with Afghanistan is so we could look down on Afghanistan. And that's an area where the
[Amit Varma]: army doesn't even allow Pakistanis to go, right? It's, it's just a restricted area,
[Amit Varma]: sort of, so to say. And we had a couple of army guys in plainclothes accompanying us
[Amit Varma]: and we got in a jeep and there were four or five of our journalists. And it was this nice
[Amit Varma]: trip. And we went right to the edge where we are, you know, standing there and looking
[Amit Varma]: down into Afghanistan. It was quite awesome. And we were told that if anywhere you are
[Amit Varma]: stopped by one of these, whatever, whatever you do, don't say you're from India, which
[Amit Varma]: is kind of obvious, right? So at one point, these guys stopped us. And this dude, with
[Amit Varma]: this big gun, and by the way, guns are ubiquitous. We went to the gun market in Peshawar, where
[Amit Varma]: you can just, you know, just buy a gun like you're buying oranges. And anyway, so this,
[Amit Varma]: this army dude with a big gun who stopped us, he just looks me in the face from like
[Amit Varma]: seven inches away and says, kahan se ho? And I said, sir, Karachi se aaye hai. And he said,
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan se aaye ho. As if Pakistan is another country, right? As if, you know, India is
[Amit Varma]: not the problem. Pakistan is a foreign country to those guys. And I of course thought of
[Amit Varma]: that as you know, many Kashmiris must be looking at India that way. But apart from that, I
[Amit Varma]: got a sense of, I've always, you know, had a sense of the Northeast a little bit like
[Amit Varma]: that. And I was really struck by this lovely phrase you use where you talk about going
[Amit Varma]: from India to almost India, you know, and I thought that's such a lovely phrase. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about your experience of Northeast India. Like, what did you expect? And what
[Amit Varma]: did you find? And what were your impressions? And, you know, is it comparable to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what I just sort of spoke about in my indulgent digression?
[Guest]: Northeast India was possibly the biggest unknown in this entire trip, for me as well. Because
[Guest]: I didn't know anyone over there, not a single, I mean, except for Meghalaya, where I had
[Guest]: friends, but in Nagaland and Manipur, I didn't know anyone. So I was quite nervous, actually.
[Guest]: And the sort of reputation that particular highway enjoys NH 39. So there, one out of
[Guest]: six days, the highway is one because of these strikes, which are called by various insurgent
[Guest]: groups. And my journey itself began on a not a very positive note. Because when I visited
[Guest]: the map, like I started off from the map or in Nagaland, which is in the plains, and pretty
[Guest]: much indistinguishable from the rest of India. So there, I found out that some insurgent
[Guest]: group has called a bun and the highway shut down for two days, and you can't go anywhere,
[Guest]: you're stuck there. So that's the note on which the journey itself began. And going
[Guest]: forward, I was hoping it would be a bit more safer. And it was because I encountered these
[Guest]: three chaps who were absolutely amazing. Amar Akbar, Anthony, they call themselves, but
[Guest]: their real names were Rahul, Michael and Mohammed. And it's almost like my brother, when he read
[Guest]: these, that particular chapter, he asked me, Are you sure you're not making this up?
[Guest]: I was like, No, not at all. Because I myself was so taken aback by this thing. I mean,
[Guest]: you have a Hindu Muslim Christian in one truck. And the interesting thing here, there is not
[Guest]: just the difference in religion, it's actually the difference in ethnicity. And as I write
[Guest]: in the book, all these three people spoke languages that belong to different language
[Guest]: families all together. I mean, in one truck, I mean, where would you find that sort of thing
[Guest]: in the world, let alone India. One of them was a Munda Adivasi from Jharkhand originally,
[Guest]: who had come to Assam generations ago as a tea worker. So he essentially spoke Munda at home,
[Guest]: which is an Austro Asiatic language. Another chap spoke Bodo, which is a Tibeto-Burman language. And
[Guest]: one of them was a Bengali Muslim. So he spoke an Indo-Aryan language. So
[Guest]: these fault lines are so many in the Northeast. In India, we just think of caste, but there is
[Guest]: religion, there is tribe, and even among the Hindus, there's caste. So quite an incredible
[Guest]: place to be in. But the sense that you got about Pakistan in Peshawar, I would say definitely
[Guest]: got it. People would repeatedly ask me if I was from India. And that was that question often was,
[Guest]: often came from a place of curiosity and slight suspicion also, because of the history of
[Guest]: the relationship between India and those parts in the ASFA, for instance, is still
[Guest]: implemented over there. So that was there. But it was a totally different place. I mean,
[Guest]: it reminded me more of the Southeast Asia that I had seen in the Lonely Planet documentaries and
[Guest]: so on, and not as much of India. And ultimately, I kind of fled from Manipur eventually as I write
[Guest]: in the book, because I have been on the road for four months. And then there were gunshots
[Guest]: outside my hotel in the dead of the night, which I still don't know what exactly happened. But
[Guest]: it sort of unnerved me. And you realize that you are in an environment that is so radically
[Guest]: different from mainland India in so many ways, that there is no, there is a tremendous sense
[Guest]: of insecurity, especially in Imphal. Kohima I quite liked. Kohima was great. There's so many
[Guest]: amazing bookshops. And the place in general is quite vibrant. I mean, apart from the fact that
[Guest]: everything shuts down at 6.30, and only the restaurants stay open till 8.30. Apart from that,
[Guest]: the place was quite young and I didn't feel out of the place over there. But Imphal definitely
[Guest]: gave me the creeps as a place. And ultimately, I decided to go back from there. But the experience
[Guest]: was an eye opener throughout right from Assam to Manipur. And I would recommend listeners to
[Guest]: visit sometime just to see what amazing landscapes and just the kind of linguistic ethnic diversity
[Amit Varma]: India has. It'll blow your mind for sure. You know, I was struck by you know, how you've written about
[Amit Varma]: the massive Korean influence in Imphal and Manipur. And also, you know, speaking of linguistic
[Amit Varma]: diversity, I was also fascinated by this new language, which you described to me like, of
[Amit Varma]: course, like, like you pointed out, there are all these different language families, Austroasiatic
[Amit Varma]: and Tibetan, Burmese and Indo-Aryan, which are kind of mingling together. And you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: this new language, which has kind of come out at the interest evolved at the intersection of all
[Amit Varma]: of these called Nagamese. Tell me a little bit about that. So Nagamese, I found like because of
[Guest]: this tremendous diversity, you have to arrive at a common language in which you can converse like
[Guest]: the lingua franca. And in Deemapur and some other parts of Nagaland, Nagamese is that standard
[Guest]: language. It's a mix of Naga words, Assamese, Bengali, Hindi. It's like, it's not an entirely
[Guest]: formed language. It's a Creole language. It's not a fully developed language, so to speak. But
[Guest]: people do get by with that. And its history is dated, dates back to centuries. Apparently,
[Guest]: the Nagas evolved this because the Assamese revenue collectors, merchants, they would frequently come
[Guest]: up to the hills to extract tribute or whatever. So this sort of language evolved to enable
[Guest]: communication between the Nagas and the Assamese. Now, of course, it has, the scope of the language
[Guest]: itself has expanded. It has also taken in Hindi words. There was a tremendous Bihari migration
[Guest]: in Deemapur and even in the Northeast everywhere. So lot of Biharis who are, I mean, almost all the
[Guest]: vegetable vendors I saw in Coimbatore were from Bihar. Or the people who are selling frogs and
[Guest]: silkworms in Deemapur were from Jharkhand. It's insane the amount of migration that happens in
[Guest]: India and all the interesting encounters this leads to. And of course, all the linguistic
[Guest]: developments it ultimately leads to. And Nagamese is the best example of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I was also kind of struck by your description of how they sometimes call themselves
[Guest]: West Southeast Asia, if I remember correctly. Yeah. So one insurgent group has branded itself
[Guest]: as the group of not Northeast India, but West Southeast Asia, which is an extremely convoluted
[Guest]: way. I mean, if you add the North over there, then you will have all the cardinal directions
[Amit Varma]: in that name. So yeah, I was also kind of struck by sort of the political economy of what's
[Amit Varma]: happening in terms of the struggles, like you, of course, spoke about, you know, the sort of
[Amit Varma]: insurgents and the battles that they're in. And I'll kind of take another digression because when
[Amit Varma]: I was, I had written an essay a long time back about the Maoist insurgencies in, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: East of India. And I'd also use the same concept while talking about the gangsters of UP. But it's
[Amit Varma]: essentially a concept which was formulated by this economist called Mankar Olson. And it's a concept
[Amit Varma]: of roving bandits and stationary bandits. And the way Olson talks about it is that imagine you're a
[Amit Varma]: village and you're just living and, you know, there's no one ruling over you and you're just
[Amit Varma]: living life. But every once in a while bandits will come and they'll wipe you out and they'll
[Amit Varma]: go away. And now there are two kinds of bandits. One kind of bandit is a roving bandit, which is
[Amit Varma]: a bandit who is passing by. And therefore, the incentives of those roving bandits are just to
[Amit Varma]: take everything they can and destroy the place and leave it completely barren. And then there
[Amit Varma]: are the stationary bandits and they are the roving bandits who come there and then they decide that
[Amit Varma]: let us just stay here and milk this place. There's no need to destroy it. And they basically become
[Amit Varma]: the state. So the state is a stationary bandit, but their incentives are different. They don't
[Amit Varma]: want to destroy these people. They just want to keep them at the level where they can continue
[Amit Varma]: taking sort of tributes from these people and continue taking hafta or taxes or whatever you
[Amit Varma]: call it. They are the state. And it seems to me that a lot of sort of low level conflict that is
[Amit Varma]: happening in India is a conflict between a state that hasn't quite managed to establish the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law and become the stationary bandit, which gives it the monopoly on violence. And these
[Amit Varma]: other people who are on one hand, they're roving bandits. And sometimes they themselves try to play
[Amit Varma]: the role of stationary bandits, like in parts of the Red Corridor where, you know, the insurgents
[Amit Varma]: will also try to provide some of those sort of services. Would that sort of framework fit what
[Amit Varma]: you saw in the Northeast? Because like at one point there is a striking quote by you where you
[Amit Varma]: say, quote, there is no real difference between the policemen and the insurgents. It's the kind
[Amit Varma]: of situation where in the same house, one brother will be a policeman and the other an Andarwala,
[Amit Varma]: he says only half joking, you're quoting someone here. And they work together in a climate of
[Amit Varma]: connivence. Chor chod chachere bhai hote hai, he says, but with no humor this time. So what was
[Amit Varma]: your sense of the dynamics of that kind of situation while you were there, especially as
[Amit Varma]: you were kind of worried about your own safety in that regard? So your description fits in perfectly
[Guest]: with what's happening over there, because they essentially run a parallel government. And it is
[Guest]: well established. It's an open secret that government employees themselves pay part of
[Guest]: their salaries to the insurgent groups. And all the businessmen have to pay something. If you want
[Guest]: to run any kind of business, you have to pay something to the NSCNIM, which is the leading
[Guest]: insurgent group in Nagaland. Recently, there was quite a bit of a controversy after the governor
[Guest]: of Nagaland, R N Ravi, he called out all these insurgent groups, called them armed, not rebels,
[Guest]: armed criminals, armed groups, which they did not take well. So there was even controversy after
[Guest]: he said that all government employees should disclose which of their relatives are in these
[Guest]: insurgent groups. And that led to a lot of discontent among the government employees
[Guest]: over there. So that situation still exists. And it has existed over the years, because
[Guest]: the insurgents over there are not really insurgents, so to say, they have a proper camp,
[Guest]: what are very few kilometers away from Bimapur, where they have their own military setup. And
[Guest]: since a couple of decades, they have a ceasefire with the Indian state, which has essentially
[Guest]: allowed them all these privileges of collecting hafta or taxes from the truckers. Truckers
[Guest]: especially have to bear the brunt of this. There's also a lot of highway robbery on S39.
[Guest]: So they are constantly put at risk because of this. And it's bewildering, you know, when you
[Guest]: go there, you can't figure out which is the state and which are the insurgents, you can
[Guest]: never really tell. Because the policemen sometimes of course will wear the uniform.
[Guest]: But otherwise, so many of the people who are collecting all these entry tax, etc, they'll
[Guest]: have nothing on, they look damn shady. They look like dangerous people, just by the looks on their
[Guest]: faces. And I can never really tell which insurgent group this guy belongs to. So there's this,
[Guest]: it's like the fog of war, right? That's the sort of situation you find yourself in. And that can
[Guest]: be very unsettling. I mean, that was part of the reason why I constantly felt a bit insecure over
[Amit Varma]: there. Because you don't know who the authority is and who the threat is. And it also strikes,
[Amit Varma]: I should also possibly clarify on your behalf that when you say the people collecting entry
[Amit Varma]: taxes had nothing on, what you mean is they had no uniform on. I am sure that they had something on.
[Amit Varma]: Apart from that, you know, when I was reading the section of your book and the Northeast,
[Amit Varma]: I was actually selfishly hoping that, you know, you would stay there longer and, you know, take
[Amit Varma]: one for the team, stay there for a couple of years and write a bit more because that was just such a
[Amit Varma]: fascinating section. Now, another sort of fascinating aspect of the book, which I really
[Amit Varma]: enjoyed, and coming back now to India in general, is your sort of detailed breakdown of the trucking
[Amit Varma]: economy. You know, where you talk about where you sort of talk about, we've already spoken about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Sattaisvijat and, you know, Chhattisvijat, but you've broken down the trucking
[Amit Varma]: sort of economy into, you know, it's different constituent parts, like there is a consigner,
[Amit Varma]: and then there is the operator. And in between them, there is a booking agent, and there is a
[Amit Varma]: commission agent. And a lot of the trucking economies of consists of really small players,
[Amit Varma]: like 75% of it is, you know, people who own less than five trucks. And, you know, so on,
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken about the information asymmetry, the cartels, corruption, and all of that all,
[Amit Varma]: you know, again, could be a whole book about the political economy of that. And it's so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that. What was the journey of discovery through these structures
[Amit Varma]: that sort of exist and within the trucking industry in India? First thing that really
[Guest]: struck me was the level of cartelization that is there in the industry. It's quite insane. I mean,
[Guest]: a very small proportion of the booking agents who are essentially the guys who are the middlemen for
[Guest]: the consignors, the guy wants to send his money. These guys essentially control the prices. And
[Guest]: there is no transparency in how this price is fixed. Because it's all over the phone,
[Guest]: it's extremely opaque. And the way these deals are structured is that
[Guest]: the share of the proceeds which goes to the trucker is negligible compared to the effort
[Guest]: and the risk that he is putting in this whole enterprise. And he's the one who's putting his
[Guest]: life at risk, right, essentially by going on the road all year. And, of course, he's the one who's
[Guest]: doing the grunt work. But around 40 to 50% of the entire amount that the consignor pays goes to the
[Guest]: middleman. So as one trucker put it to me, India is a country of Dalals. And that really struck me
[Guest]: because across the landscape, I mean, I don't know if there is any estimate on what proportion of
[Guest]: India earns its living just by being a middleman. I mean, I'm sure it's going to be huge,
[Guest]: right from the agricultural markets, where we see the dominance of the Arhatiyas to the
[Guest]: sort of fixers that exist even outside government offices who can get your files passed. I mean,
[Guest]: these are all middlemen, right, who are somehow earning a living by doing as little as possible
[Guest]: and getting as much as possible in return. And this is the trucking industry is also no stranger
[Guest]: to this. In fact, I would say it's one of the industries which is highly dominated by intermediaries.
[Guest]: So that was quite a revelation. How I found all this was by going to these transport nagars,
[Guest]: which are ubiquitous. They are there in almost every small and big city. You will have one
[Guest]: transport nagar where all the trucks will go. The offices of all the middlemen will be over there,
[Guest]: who will connect the supplier to the trucker. And these places are quite great. I mean,
[Guest]: you can just go to any office, sit, the guy will offer you some chai, a couple of more
[Guest]: cups and you can just sit there and chat. They don't have much on their hands, they'll have their
[Guest]: phone in between, but they're happy to chat usually. So I spent quite a lot of time in
[Guest]: these transport nagars across India. Every place I went to, I would spend one day in the transport
[Guest]: nagar, just try to talk to people and just figure out how things work there. So that was quite
[Guest]: interesting. And the corruption in the industry, it accounts for around 50,000 crore a year.
[Guest]: So the latest estimate says that around 50,000 crores rupees is paid in bribes by truckers.
[Guest]: It is staggering. It's 5 trillion rupees in just one year. And that was quite insane.
[Guest]: And these arrangements are highly organized. That was another striking thing. The truckers in
[Guest]: Udaipur pointed out to me, they are actually given these coded receipts,
[Guest]: like there will be something written on it, QSS, just to clarify to the guy who's
[Guest]: going to extract money ahead that you have already paid it. And it's stunning how organized it is.
[Guest]: And the truckers of course bear the brunt of this. Every person who stops them extracts some
[Guest]: money from them. And the survey said that around 40% of them give no reason at all.
[Guest]: And the interesting thing is that around 30% of them take money in the name of Mata Ka Jagran.
[Guest]: That some of these local groups will say that, okay, we have this Mata Ka Jagran here happening.
[Guest]: So then this is not even the state. These are just random people and who may be linked to
[Guest]: the political class in some way, but it's not government officials. So this is another thing
[Guest]: which was quite striking because there is no difference as such between the state and these
[Guest]: sort of shadowy figures who are linked to the local political economy in many ways.
[Guest]: In Goa, for instance, one chap told me that all the money that is extracted from them,
[Guest]: Goa is like a lot of mining happens there. It used to happen. And trucks have a terrible
[Guest]: time in Goa like drivers. I mean, our experiences, of course, is that of an idyllic vacations.
[Guest]: But for truckers, Goa is just a terrible place. And he says the majority of the people who
[Guest]: collect this money are just agents of some local politician. There is a blurring between
[Guest]: the state and you realize what the level of rule of law is that exists in reality on Indian
[Guest]: highways. And throughout the recurring pattern was of this only the complete breakdown of rule
[Guest]: and law in many ways, sometimes by the state itself and sometimes by these extra legal authorities.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's, that's so fascinating to me, like the state as the supposed stationary bandit,
[Amit Varma]: but not managing to be the stationary bandit efficiently enough. So all of these little
[Amit Varma]: other sort of roving bandits becoming stationary. Therefore, while I'll come back to the corruption
[Amit Varma]: angle of it, because that's so fascinating. But first, you know, to go back to the way the
[Amit Varma]: the trucking economy is structured. So tell me if I got that right, there is a consigner who has to
[Amit Varma]: send goods somewhere. And there is a trucker who is actually taking the goods somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And in between, there are two kinds of agents. One is a booking agent who is dealing with the
[Amit Varma]: consigner and saying, okay, this is the kind of money I'll take from you to get the job done.
[Amit Varma]: And below that is the commission agent, who is a guy who the booking agent contacts and who is
[Amit Varma]: then passing the job on to the trucker himself. Now, over here, what is happening is, as you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, there is asymmetry of information. Nobody knows what the guy above him in the food
[Amit Varma]: chain is really charging. And this is a huge problem. So give me a sense of supposing if you
[Amit Varma]: have any idea of a broad, mota mota idea of these kind of figures, that supposing I am a consigner,
[Amit Varma]: and I am paying 100 rupees to get my goods taken from X to Y, how much of that 100 is going to the
[Guest]: trucker? I would say around 60 of that will go to the trucker. Yeah, 50 to 60 will go to that
[Guest]: trucker. The intermediaries take around 40 to 50% of whatever the money is. The booking agents will
[Guest]: take more than the commission agent. That's really interesting because I
[Amit Varma]: cannot imagine that if someone manages to disrupt the market and clean up some of the friction in
[Amit Varma]: between, then the consigner can pay 90 instead of 100. And the trucker can take 70 instead of
[Amit Varma]: 60. And you can still have enough leftover for the middleman. But I guess that the middlemen
[Amit Varma]: themselves are a kind of mafia and they control access. And it would be very difficult to break
[Guest]: into that kind of market, right? Yeah, in many ways, you know. So you know,
[Guest]: I have talked to some startup folks also, you know, who are trying to break this stranglehold
[Guest]: of the intermediaries. And so theoretically, it's so easy, right? You make one nice portal,
[Guest]: where you connect the consigner to the trucking agent himself, and you just eliminate the
[Guest]: middleman. Theoretically, it sounds so simple. But like you said, the middlemen are like a proper
[Guest]: mafia. So the offices of these guys, they were working in Vishakhapatnam at that time,
[Guest]: their offices were attacked, broken into, pretty much trashed by the goondas of these middlemen,
[Guest]: who realized that these guys are gaining some traction in the area and cutting our business.
[Guest]: So they are quite a powerful segment in this industry. And it all works on the phone, right?
[Guest]: That sort of tech adoption and penetration of technology in this industry is especially low,
[Guest]: compared to many others. And given India's terrible networks, I mean, when you go to the highway in
[Guest]: the city itself, often it's bad. When you go to the highways, though, no question. So all that
[Guest]: makes it very difficult to sort of address this stranglehold of the intermediaries. And most of
[Guest]: the startups that are in this space, this logistic space and in the business of removing the
[Guest]: intermediaries, most of them have given up. There are a couple of them, but largely most of them
[Guest]: have shut shop. That tells a lot about how much control and influence the intermediaries have.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. I was also, you know, struck by different parts of your book,
[Amit Varma]: there is the intermingling of sort of history with your narrative. And at one point, you talk about
[Amit Varma]: how Shersa Suri did so many things to eliminate the highway robbery problem, because even though
[Amit Varma]: you don't have trucks in that time, you do have goods being transported and you do have the
[Amit Varma]: problem of highway robbers. And I'll ask you a bit to elaborate upon that and elaborate on,
[Amit Varma]: you know, then the irony that in modern times, as you say, in your book, I'll read out again
[Amit Varma]: from what you've written, where you write, quote, if we were to compare medieval and modern India,
[Amit Varma]: it would seem things have both changed and remained the same. While the highways today
[Amit Varma]: are relatively safer and punishments less drastic, official extraction from truckers,
[Amit Varma]: highway robbery by another name, continues unabated, perpetrated with the aid of extractive
[Amit Varma]: innovations such as mechanical, stop quote, and mechanical is within single quotes, it's obviously
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of fine that you described, which was very opaque, and then you got to the
[Amit Varma]: bottom of it. And you found that it was for flouting rules, which are itself written so vaguely
[Amit Varma]: that they're open to interpretation. And therefore, it is sort of highway robbery. And as you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, there is highway robbery by the state and by others. So it seems that there is a culture
[Amit Varma]: of highway robbery, which has come all the way from Shersa Suri and all that. And that's also a
[Amit Varma]: kind of a fascinating period. So tell me about sort of the historical development of the culture
[Guest]: of our roads, so to say. The two main highways of India, historically Uttarapath and Dakshinapath.
[Guest]: So these two were the historical main highways. One Uttarapath linked Peshawar to Bengal. And
[Guest]: the Dakshinapath linked Bihar, the Pataliputra through Madhya Pradesh, etc. to the west coast
[Guest]: and to Maharashtra. So and from there, there were other routes which went across South India. These
[Guest]: were the two main routes. And what we see from history is that highway robbers have existed as
[Guest]: long as there were roads. So for example, Angulimal, who features like in the Buddhist Jataka
[Guest]: stories, he was a notorious highway robber. And this tradition continues. The state did try
[Guest]: historically to curb this menace and make things safer. For example, in the Mahajanapada period,
[Guest]: around 600 BC, there were officials who were appointed called Rajukas, whose job was to
[Guest]: protect the travelers and the merchants. That was their essential job. Of course, there were also
[Guest]: customs agents called the Kamikaz, who would take money from them, legitimate taxes and so on. But
[Guest]: in practice, highway robbery has been a part and parcel of the transportation culture in India,
[Guest]: because we think of highway robbery as this violent, the coyotes and bandits who will come
[Guest]: and attack you. But highway robbery also takes place when someone without any legitimacy and
[Guest]: without any authority is taking money from you, maybe not using the threat of violence itself,
[Guest]: but who's taking money from you in a matter of fact way and you are giving it to them. And that
[Guest]: has continued across history. So we have like petty Rajas. So any sort of political authority
[Guest]: who establishes himself in certain area, he will say that, okay, whatever roads are passing through
[Guest]: this, these are under my control. And anyone who are passing through the entry tax that we call it
[Guest]: right now, that sort of entry tax has been collected across history. And Sher Shah Suri played
[Guest]: an interesting role in curbing this, because what he realized was all these highway robbers operate
[Guest]: with the knowledge and the active cooperation of the village headmen, which are around these
[Guest]: highways. So the village headmen were a very influential constituency at that time. And
[Guest]: so what he did was that he said, if any the coyote or robbery takes place in your area,
[Guest]: it is the job of the village headman called the Mukaddam to either find the culprit and compensate
[Guest]: the traveler for the loss of his property. And if someone is killed, then it is the job of the
[Guest]: Mukaddam to find the guy or you, the Mukaddam himself will lose his life. So that's a bit
[Guest]: drastic, but it worked during his period, at least. And we have the writings of a Mughal
[Guest]: historian actually, called Abbas Sherwani, who writes about the kind of changes he brought.
[Guest]: Now Sher Shah Suri as a figure is just fascinating. He is one of my favorite figures from Indian
[Guest]: history, partly because he has so much to do with the development of the highway system in India.
[Guest]: And he was the one who renovated the Uttarapatha, which what we know as the Grand Trunk Road now.
[Guest]: So he renovated it from across the entire terrain. He also built new roads from Agra to
[Guest]: Gujarat, Agra to Marwar and so on. So he expanded the road network a lot firstly,
[Guest]: and he also built a network of thousands of Sarais, Sarais being these resting
[Guest]: places for travelers. And many of these Sarais later then grew to become Kasbahs. I mean,
[Guest]: they were the nucleus of urbanization. So there would be a marketplace which would form around
[Guest]: this Sarai. Slowly that marketplace would turn into a small town. And so that is how a lot of
[Guest]: urbanization happened in India also. Like even today, the Mughal Sarai, Begu Sarai, all these
[Guest]: are prominent junctions, right? And the name reveals that they originated from a simple,
[Guest]: small Sarai, a resting house for travelers. So that was another one of his contributions.
[Guest]: Overall, I feel as a figure, he is massively underrated in Indian history, partly because
[Guest]: he is this sort of an upstart figure who rises from nowhere, rags to riches, often uses
[Guest]: unscrupulous means to gain power. And he is not like the perfect role model, say to say, for a
[Guest]: newly independent India, which was looking for these very straight-jacketed figures like Akbar
[Guest]: and Ashoka, whose values fit in with that of a budding nation, like they are secular. At the
[Guest]: same time, they are tolerant, they are non-violent. And all these factors led us to privilege these
[Guest]: figures other than Sher Shah Suri, who was a brilliant administrator. And he was also secular
[Guest]: in his own way. I mean, he did not really discriminate as such in his army and so on,
[Guest]: in terms of recruitment. And his administrative innovations themselves were quite remarkable.
[Guest]: He introduced the rupaiya, which we know as the rupee today. He introduced the use of Hindi,
[Guest]: Hindavi as it was known then, in the local administration. Earlier, only Persian was used.
[Guest]: So this led to good things for the local population. So I'm basically a big fan of
[Guest]: Sher Shah Suri. And I think he should be more celebrated, maybe a biopic someday.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe a biopic someday. If Akshay Kumar is listening to this, we are in trouble,
[Amit Varma]: Rajat, and it is your fault. And it's interesting that you talk about sort of building up Akbar and
[Amit Varma]: Ashoka as modern heroes, because even there, I mean, people contain multitudes. And even they
[Amit Varma]: had different aspects to them. And it's almost as if, you know, they were at one point, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sort of presented as these people with these very salutary sides of themselves, Ashoka,
[Amit Varma]: the man of peace and all of that, and Akbar being secular and whatever, when you know,
[Amit Varma]: there were other aspects to their character as well. And perhaps we'll really mature as a society
[Amit Varma]: when we can get closer to this embracing of complexity. I kind of smiled when you were
[Amit Varma]: talking about the mukaddams because I thought all my listeners will immediately say, here is where
[Amit Varma]: Amit talks about incentives. And that's actually a place to talk about incentives in two ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like one, of course, if you're telling the mukaddam that if you don't catch the thief,
[Amit Varma]: I will behead you. That is an incentive for the mukaddam to do the job of policing well.
[Amit Varma]: But it is also an incentive for him to catch any random guy he doesn't like and say that is a thief,
[Amit Varma]: I have caught him, behead him and end of story. So one, you know, those go in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And that would also be unseen in a modern context, because what would we know of the many people
[Amit Varma]: wrongfully implicated by medieval mukaddams. But, you know, coming back to sort of your journeys,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that when you travel, especially when you travel in the way that you are doing,
[Amit Varma]: where you're going deeper into context, and, you know, where traditions arise from, and so on,
[Amit Varma]: you're not just traveling through space, you're also traveling through time, right?
[Amit Varma]: You're not just exploring India as it is today, you're also exploring the history of India.
[Amit Varma]: You also get drawn to do sort of history writing, and is travel writing to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: history writing? Is there a continuum? And do you like, you know, you were earlier talking about
[Amit Varma]: the fascinating history of truck art, where, you know, 12th century ships could look like
[Amit Varma]: 21st century trucks, and how that's been documented so much in Pakistan, and so much of that is
[Amit Varma]: fascinating, and then Shersha Suri and all that. So do you also then feel like writing a travel
[Amit Varma]: book sometime, which is a travel through time and not a travel through space as such, which is
[Guest]: just sort of historical? You know, I am a huge history buff. And the more I read history over
[Guest]: the years, I realized that travel accounts play such a huge role in our reconstruction,
[Guest]: the reconstruction of our history as we know it. And like right from Yuan Tsang to
[Guest]: Ibn Battuta, these guys have left such pivotal account, which give us so much specific
[Guest]: information about India at that point. And it is so valuable. But even in these accounts, you know,
[Guest]: I find that there is very little mention of the common people about the texture of ordinary life
[Guest]: as it were. Because these guys often hung around in noble circles, their audience itself was
[Guest]: often of a courtly background. So probably they didn't mention they didn't find it important
[Guest]: enough to mention it. And, but there is so much poverty of these accounts of the ordinary people,
[Guest]: I mean, historians struggle so much to reconstruct how the life of an ordinary peasant or an ordinary
[Guest]: merchant would have been. And that I feel really bad about it, because it's so dominated by these,
[Guest]: the doings of these kings and so on. But I mean, how much of that really mattered to the ordinary
[Guest]: peasant at that point, I highly doubt much of it did. So my motivation for travel writing is,
[Guest]: is for me, travel writing is nothing but making the mundane interesting, and just capturing the
[Guest]: texture of everyday life. I mean, there are other genres, I mean, a lot of nonfiction academic
[Guest]: research, which gets deep into topics and presents a thoughtful analysis of them. But for me, travel
[Guest]: writing has a separate job, which is to just document the ordinary and make it interesting
[Guest]: for the reader. And who knows, hopefully someday, these accounts will serve as a way to recreate
[Guest]: history of the early 21st century. I mean, and that is my ultimate goal in the long term,
[Guest]: that is what really motivates me. And that's why I'm only interested in writing about the
[Guest]: ordinary people of India, and what their life about their hopes or what they think,
[Guest]: these things often go undocumented in other places. I mean, travel writing is the place
[Guest]: to cover them. And I feel very strongly about that. And yeah, like I said, I mean,
[Guest]: it's deeply connected with history, right? I mean, our attitudes, or the particular positions,
[Guest]: the circumstances we find ourselves in, various people have their own little histories, they're
[Guest]: linked to their family and their caste. And all of this is what is India for me, I mean, for me,
[Guest]: you know, just like we say that, in every person resides God, for me, in every person resides India.
[Guest]: And every person is a representative of India in so many ways. And that is what I'm
[Guest]: very moved to explore and write about. Hopefully, in the future, I'll get to write more.
[Amit Varma]: No, that that multiplicity of visions at an individual level is kind of fascinating to me,
[Amit Varma]: you know, earlier in this episode, you spoke about how we experience Goa as tourists,
[Amit Varma]: but truck drivers experience it as, you know, a much more dangerous, difficult place to navigate.
[Amit Varma]: I remember in my years playing poker professionally, I encountered it in a whole different
[Amit Varma]: way, which is kind of, you know, quite apart from that. And this is a beautiful passage from your
[Amit Varma]: book, which kind of speaks to that, which comes from where, when sort of you are in the northeast,
[Amit Varma]: and you go to sleep somewhere on the highway in a truck, and you wake up in the morning, and you
[Amit Varma]: take a little walk, and the Andarwalas referred to here are of course, the extremists that you're
[Amit Varma]: worried about. And at this point, you write this passage, I'll quote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: My fear of Andarwalas interrupting our journey has been unfounded. Instead, I have witnessed one
[Amit Varma]: of the most splendid sunrises of my life. I guess such is the nature of travel, when the true nature
[Amit Varma]: of a place reveals itself, or perhaps when you realize there is no true nature of a place.
[Amit Varma]: It is merely the images we associate with the place that shape our perception of it.
[Amit Varma]: The human brain is incapable of associating more than a handful of things with this.
[Amit Varma]: Its job is to underplay complexity and categorize reality into simplicity.
[Amit Varma]: That's why one must never internalize anything the world tells you about a place.
[Amit Varma]: The only way to travel is to forget everything you think you know about a place, discover it
[Amit Varma]: anew, forge new associations, associations that are all your own. I for one knew that after this
[Amit Varma]: trip, I will always remember this sunrise when I think of Nagaland and not insurgents or headhunting
[Amit Varma]: tribals. Stop coding. This was such a beautiful passage in one of the highlights of the book.
[Amit Varma]: And this also, you know, leads to sort of a conflict within the travel writer, which in a
[Amit Varma]: very minor way, I think I felt when, you know, in earlier small travels I have made, like when I was
[Amit Varma]: traveling to Pakistan in 2006, I live blogged the event, I would put up multiple posts in a day,
[Amit Varma]: and I was blogging a lot. And at one point, I realized that there is a danger here. And the
[Amit Varma]: danger is that trying, because of that imperative that I have given myself, of trying to find the
[Amit Varma]: extraordinary in the mundane, where I might write about a chalk and just imbue it with significance,
[Amit Varma]: while for the person around there, it's just a chalk, it's just a pillar.
[Amit Varma]: And the other aspect of that, of course, is that as a local person, where I am in my cities,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's Mumbai or whatever, and Mumbai is also, you know, has so many layers of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all the different centuries and the influences that are here. And both of us,
[Amit Varma]: of course, are in Mumbai right now, although remote, because of this dreaded pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: So question there is that then there is a trade off that on the one hand, you want to take a step
[Amit Varma]: out where you're suddenly more mindful of everything, and therefore in a position to
[Amit Varma]: recognize the special, where it might otherwise be normalized. But on the other hand, there might
[Amit Varma]: also be the tendency for the travel writer, the imperative, so to say, the incentive almost,
[Amit Varma]: to find something special in everything that is ordinary. Is that something that you've thought
[Amit Varma]: about? Like, how does one navigate? On the one hand, the travel writer's gaze is going to be
[Amit Varma]: a little deeper, but is there a danger that it goes sort of too deep?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question. I mean, I have thought about it in the
[Guest]: sense that, yeah, it, it is possible to go overboard in contextualizing a place.
[Guest]: I mean, often what happens is that you go a bit too deep. I mean, for the I'm, when I'm writing,
[Guest]: I always think about the reader. And for me, the reader is someone who like has a smartphone
[Guest]: within range, and who's going to pick that up the moment you lose his attention. So I
[Guest]: that my attempts always are to set the context, but not to the extent where I am losing sight of
[Guest]: the place I am in. You know, often what happens is that you get into the history of a place and so
[Guest]: on. And you lose sight of what is in front of you, which often is mundane, like you said,
[Guest]: so there is that risk. But overall, I think the job of the travel writer is to open someone's
[Guest]: eyes to the fascinating realities of multiplicities of the world around you. And of the ordinary
[Guest]: person who probably thinks yaar yeh kya pakao cheez hai yeh bahar jo hai. But the travel writer's
[Guest]: job is to make him see the beauty in it. And for me, that is what it is. I mean, I am someone who
[Guest]: likes to see the beauty in everything. It can get a bit annoying, but I genuinely find a lot of
[Guest]: things beautiful. I mean, part of that comes from I think science. I mean, Richard Feynman was a
[Guest]: huge influence on me when I was growing up. And the way he sees beauty in the smallest of
[Guest]: phenomenon, I mean, the world is an incredibly fascinating and beautiful place. And it is that
[Guest]: sort of enthusiasm for the world which I wish to transmit through my writing. And that is what I
[Amit Varma]: believe the purpose of travel writing is. Great. So I've taken a lot of your time today. So I'll
[Amit Varma]: kind of end with a final question. And at one point early in the book, you talk about this
[Amit Varma]: truck driver Shyam, and you're sort of traveling with him. And he says he likes Kishore Kumar.
[Amit Varma]: And you ask him his favorite song. And he, you know, names a song and then you ask him to sing,
[Amit Varma]: he sings a bit of that, and then he feels embarrassed feeling that he's revealed a bit of
[Amit Varma]: himself to you. And the lyrics of that lovely song, of course, are, quote,
[Amit Varma]: Jeevan ke safar mera hi milte hai bichhar jaane ko, aur de jaate hai yaade, tanhai mein tarpaane ko.
[Amit Varma]: And this sort of seems to me to summarize so well, that, you know, the loneliness of the
[Amit Varma]: long distance trucker as we spoke about. But is this something that you felt at the end of the
[Amit Varma]: book that, you know, was there the sense of loss that, you know, these are all people who at
[Amit Varma]: different levels, you must have been close to, like, are you in touch with them? Have you sent
[Amit Varma]: your book to any of them? You've mentioned that, you know, after all the writing was done, you were
[Amit Varma]: still what's happening with them and all of that. What is that relationship like? And also, it must
[Amit Varma]: be a complicated one, because at one level, they were instrumental to you in the sense that you
[Amit Varma]: were using them to go on a journey and write a book. But at the other level, you have been upfront
[Amit Varma]: about what you want, and they know that. And then on the basis of that, your relationship is
[Amit Varma]: a kind of building and there is a lot of warmth there. And, you know, one gets a sense of those
[Amit Varma]: little little intimacies that are scattered through the book. So what is it like now when you
[Amit Varma]: think of them and also having so many different friends who are not from the earlier bubbles,
[Amit Varma]: you were part of like engineering or journalism or whatever, does it change the way you look at
[Amit Varma]: people in general, like people who are unseen to us in a way, you know, maybe the beggar at the
[Amit Varma]: traffic signal or the person serving chai at the dhaba we go to, do you feel you kind of look at
[Amit Varma]: them differently and that your gaze has been impacted by these experiences? So as far as
[Guest]: them being instrumental, I wouldn't go as far to say that because you know, when I set out on the
[Guest]: trip, I had no idea I mean, this book was ever going to come out, or I'm even going to write one,
[Guest]: I did it mainly to have some fun and make some friends along the way. So I mean, I did take notes
[Guest]: and all in case it comes handy someday, but that possibility seemed remote to me because
[Guest]: what I was thinking at that point was, who's going to read about it? I mean,
[Guest]: while I was interested in it, but often there's this niggling doubt, right? Is this something
[Guest]: that's interesting for the wider world? And that self doubt is something that eats you away in many
[Guest]: ways. So that was how so we used to hang out like just like someone who I met and who are going to
[Guest]: be separated in some time. So you speak all that you can in that in that particular time. Over the
[Guest]: years, I have fallen out of touch also with them. Because what happens with truckers, especially,
[Guest]: you know, they change so many phone numbers, they keep changing their phone numbers. I don't know
[Guest]: why. And if they change their boss, they start working for a different owner, then their number
[Guest]: will change. And they're constantly on the move, right? It's incredibly difficult to talk to them
[Guest]: on the phone, because they are always busy. They're either driving on the road and it's
[Guest]: incomprehensible on the phone, you know, when you try to talk. So all these factors made it
[Guest]: very difficult to keep in touch. Jora and Jagdev were two people who I did keep in touch with.
[Guest]: I've also sent them a copy of my book. So hopefully they like it. Because I don't think
[Guest]: they can read English. My next plan is to somehow get this translated to Hindi or Punjabi.
[Guest]: Because there is so much readership for these two, these kind of stories from the
[Guest]: internet. And even you don't even need to change the title of the book. The title of the book
[Guest]: remains the same. I hope to get it translated soon. And yeah, I mean, how I see the wider world,
[Guest]: I think has remained the same. I mean, I've always been curious about the underclass,
[Guest]: about someone who we don't ordinarily meet in our circles and so on. So that part has remained the
[Guest]: same. Though my understanding of the world of truckers definitely has improved. But the way
[Guest]: I view the larger world, I think has probably remained the same, which is something that
[Amit Varma]: motivated me to go on this trip in the first place. And finally, are you writing something
[Amit Varma]: now? Is there something your devoted readers such as myself can expect from you? Are you taking one
[Amit Varma]: for the team in one way or another so that we can read a great book? Yeah, I am working on my
[Guest]: second travel book. So I have signed something with HarperCollins. And it should come out in
[Guest]: the next couple of years. Quite excited. It's another. I'm going to explore another class of
[Guest]: itinerants who we don't get to read much about. But it's all going to be about the ordinary people
[Guest]: of India, and their relationship with the world with God and all these things. So it's quite
[Guest]: excited about it. And yeah, hopefully the readers will like you will enjoy it.
[Amit Varma]: Sounds fascinating. And I can't wait. I'll, I won't take any more of your time because I want
[Amit Varma]: you to get back to writing that book, which I'm so eager to read. Rajat, thank you so much for
[Amit Varma]: your time and your insights. And you know, having the patience to sit through all these technical
[Amit Varma]: difficulties as we record this episode. I appreciate that. Thank you so much, Amit.
[Guest]: Entirely my pleasure. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to your nearest bookstore online or
[Amit Varma]: offline and pick up Rajat Obaikar's wonderful book, Truck Day India, A Hitchhiker's Guide to
[Amit Varma]: Hindustan. You can follow Rajat on Twitter at Rajat UB. That's one word. You can follow me
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at
[Amit Varma]: sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like
[Amit Varma]: to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.